The research team reports that drying areas on land are expanding at a rate roughly twice the size of California every year. And, the rate at which dry areas are getting drier now outpaces the rate at which wet areas are getting wetter, reversing long-standing hydrological patterns. The negative implications of this for available freshwater are staggering. 75% of the world's population lives in 101 countries that have been losing freshwater for the past 22 years. According to the United Nations, the world's population is expected to continue to grow for the next 50 to 60 years -- at the same time the availability of freshwater is dramatically shrinking. The researchers identified the type of water loss on land, and for the first time, found that 68% came from groundwater alone -- contributing more to sea level rise than the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets combined. "These findings send perhaps the most alarming message yet about the impact of climate change on our water resources," said Jay Famiglietti, the study's principal investigator and a Global Futures Professor with the ASU School of Sustainability. "Continents are drying, freshwater availability is shrinking, and sea level rise is accelerating. The consequences of continued groundwater overuse could undermine food and water security for billions of people around the world. This is an 'all-hands-on-deck' moment -- we need immediate action on global water security." The researchers evaluated more than two decades of data from the US-German Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) and GRACE-Follow On (GRACE-FO) missions, looking at how and why terrestrial water storage has changed since 2002. Terrestrial water storage includes all of Earth's surface and vegetation water, soil moisture, ice, snow, and groundwater stored on land. "It is striking how much non-renewable water we are losing," said Hrishikesh A. Chandanpurkar, lead author of the study and a research scientist for ASU. "Glaciers and deep groundwater are sort of ancient trust funds. Instead of using them only in times of need such as a prolonged drought, we are taking them for granted. Also, we are not trying to replenish the groundwater systems during wet years and thus edging towards an imminent freshwater bankruptcy." Tipping point and worsening continental drying The study identified what seems to be a tipping point around 2014-15 during a time considered "mega El-Niño" years. Climate extremes began accelerating and in response, groundwater use increased and continental drying exceeded the rates of glacier and ice sheet melting. Additionally, the study revealed a previously unreported oscillation where after 2014, drying regions flipped from being located mostly in the southern hemisphere to mostly in the north, and vice versa for wet regions. One of the key drivers contributing to continental drying is the increasing extremes of drought in the mid-latitudes of the northern hemisphere, for example, in Europe. Additionally, in Canada and Russia, snow, ice, and permafrost melting increased over the last decade, and the continued depletion of groundwater globally is a major factor. In a previous study, members of the team studied terrestrial water storage from satellite data spanning 2002 -- 2016. In the new study, the team looked at more than 20 years of data and discovered a critical, major development in continental drying. Several regional drying patterns and previously identified localized 'hotspots' for terrestrial water storage loss are now interconnected -- forming the four continental-scale mega drying regions. These include: Southwestern North America and Central America: this region includes major food-producing regions across the American Southwest, along with major desert cities such as Phoenix, Tucson, Las Vegas, and major metropolitan areas such as Los Angeles and Mexico City. Alaska and Northern Canada: this region includes melting alpine glaciers in Alaska and British Columbia, snow and permafrost melting across the Canadian high latitudes, and drying in major agricultural regions such as British Columbia and Saskatchewan Northern Russia: this region is experiencing major snow and permafrost melting across the high latitudes Middle East-North Africa (MENA) Pan-Eurasia: this region includes major desert cities including Dubai, Casablanca, Cairo, Baghdad and Tehran; major food producing regions including Ukraine, northwest India, and China's North China Plain region; the shrinking Caspian and Aral Seas; and major cities such as Barcelona, Paris, Berlin, Dhaka and Beijing. In fact, the study showed that since 2002, only the tropics have continued to get wetter on average by latitude, something not predicted by IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) climate models -- sophisticated computer programs used to project future climate scenarios. Continuous records are critical in understanding the long-term changes in the water cycle. "This study really shows how important it is to have continuous observations of a variable such as terrestrial water storage," said Chandanpurkar. "GRACE records are really getting to the length where we are able to robustly see long-term trends from climate variability. More in-situ observations and data sharing would further support in making this separation and inform water management." A Planetary Wake-Up Call The unprecedented scale of continental drying threatens agriculture and food security, biodiversity, freshwater supplies and global stability. The current study highlights the need for ongoing research at scale to inform policymakers and communities about worsening water challenges and opportunities to create meaningful change. "This research matters. It clearly shows that we urgently need new policies and groundwater management strategies on a global scale," said Famiglietti, who is also with the Julie Ann Wrigley Global Futures Laboratory and a former Senior Water Scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. "While efforts to mitigate climate change are facing challenges, we can address continental drying by implementing new policies around regional and international groundwater sustainability. In turn, this will slow the rate of sea level rise and help preserve water for future generations." The study calls for immediate action to slow and reverse groundwater depletion, protect remaining freshwater resources, and adapt to the growing risk of water scarcity and coastal flooding. The research team goes on to say that strategic water management, international cooperation, and sustainable policies are essential to preserving water for future generations and mitigating further damage to planetary systems. The research will also support an upcoming World Bank Group flagship report that will delve deeper into these findings, including the human and economic implications of continental drying, and present actionable solutions for countries to address the growing freshwater crisis. About the Study The findings are based on over 22 years of terrestrial water storage data from US-German GRACE and GRACE-FO satellite missions. The full report details the scientific analyses and regional breakdowns of the drying trends, which have proven robust and persistent despite climate variability. The research team includes scientists from Arizona State University; Hrishikesh A. Chandanpurkar, FLAME University; John T. Reager and David N. Wiese, JPL; Kaushik Gopalan and Yoshihide Wada, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology; Kauru Kakinuma, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology; and Fan Zhang, The World Bank. This research was funded by the Julie Ann Wrigley Global Futures Laboratory at Arizona State University, the GRACE Follow-On Science Team, and World Bank Global Water Monitoring.

A new study published in Nature Climate Change reveals how plant genebanks, home to millions of genetically diverse plants around the world, can help speed up the process of breeding crops better suited for climate change. "Climate driven pressures on food crops touch every country on our planet and this technique holds promise for making more use of our global genebanks," said co-author Michael Kantar of the UH Manoa College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resilience (CTAHR). Living libraries that fight climate change According to Kantar, plant genebanks are essential for protecting the genetic diversity of food crops. These "living libraries" store seeds and other genetic material, providing a vital resource for plant breeders working to develop new crop varieties that have a range of traits from drought resistance to disease tolerance. The researchers used sorghum, a grain grown for food, fuel, and livestock feed, to test a new method called environmental genomic selection. It combines DNA data with climate information to predict which plants are best suited for future conditions. "It can be applied to any crop that has the right data, these include sorghum, barley, cannabis, pepper and dozens of other crops," said Kantar. The approach also saves time. Instead of testing thousands of plants in the field, scientists use a smaller, diverse "mini-core" group to forecast how crops will perform in different environments. This helps breeders quickly select the best parents for new, climate-resilient varieties. "This method will help us keep pace with the hotter temperatures and increased risk of flooding from Earth's changing climate and help develop new varieties to ensure food security," Kantar said. Researchers discovered that nations with high sorghum use may need genetic resources from other countries to effectively adapt to climate change stressing the value of global teamwork in securing the world's food supply.

Higher temperatures, more frequent and longer droughts, catastrophic rainfall events and rising atmospheric carbon dioxide levels all influence the growth, development and reproductive viability of crop plants, he writes. While some plants and regions may benefit from some aspects of climate change, without prolonged and costly intervention, many more will suffer potentially catastrophic declines. "By 2050-60, crops will experience a significantly different environment from today," Long writes. From its pre-industrial level of about 200 parts per million, "atmospheric CO 2 reached 427 ppm in 2024 and is projected to be about 600 ppm by 2050." Extreme heat, droughts, floods and other climate-related events are already disrupting agricultural systems. Projected temperature extremes and climate instability will further reduce crop yields, increasing starvation, political unrest and mass migration, he writes. There is some hope, however. It may be possible to alter crops in ways that allow them to persist and perhaps even increase yields despite the challenges, Long said. While the process takes time and can be costly, the work has already begun. For example, researchers are evaluating the heat-, drought- and flood-tolerance of different varieties of specific crop plants, identifying those with potentially beneficial attributes. Discovering the genetic traits that confer these benefits will allow scientists to develop crops -- through plant breeding and/or genetic engineering -- that can better withstand the extremes. Through painstaking work, scientists have discovered that some rice varieties can survive up to two weeks of submergence during periods of intense flooding, while other varieties are more heat tolerant than others. The findings offer opportunities to develop hardier cultivars. Plants must withstand an array of challenges as temperatures rise. The drying capacity of the atmosphere, which increases with temperature, draws moisture out of plant leaves through tiny pores called stomata. This reduces plant water-use efficiency, Long said, straining already scarce water resources in many parts of the globe. "A plant may partially close its stomata to retain moisture, but this can interfere with its ability to draw carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, a key step in photosynthesis," Long said. In laboratory and field experiments, researchers found that increasing the expression of the gene for a sensor protein found in plants reduced water loss through stomata without interfering with photosynthesis. "The result was a 15% improvement in leaf-level water-use efficiency in field-grown tobacco and a 30% decrease in whole plant water use," Long wrote. Because of the high speed with which it can be genetically modified, tobacco is often used as a "test-bed" for studying alterations that can be used in a variety of other plants. Researchers also have found ways to reduce the density of stomata on the leaves of rice and wheat, improving water-use efficiency by 15-20% with no decrease in yield. High carbon dioxide on its own alters plant physiology, sometimes in beneficial ways by boosting photosynthesis, but also in detrimental ways, Long said. High CO 2 can change plant metabolic control by altering levels of key enzymes. Scientists have found that adjusting the levels of proteins that regulate rubisco, a key photosynthetic enzyme, can boost photosynthetic efficiency in the presence of high CO 2 . To demonstrate what kinds of gains are possible in food crops, Long points to the remarkable progress made in research on maize, nearly 80% of which is used in ethanol production and to feed animals, not humans. "Between 1980 and 2024, U.S. maize yields doubled while sorghum improved just 12%," he said. The success in maize is the result of massive investments from large multinational companies. The same investments are not yet being made on the public domain side of the equation. Without similar investment, "it is hard to see how the opportunities … for future-proofing our crops can be implemented at the scale that is necessary," he writes. Long also is a professor in the Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology at the U. of I. He is supported by Gates Agricultural Innovations and the Department of Energy Center for Advanced Bioenergy and Bioproducts Innovation.

Salinization of freshwater and soils adversely affects 500 million people around the world, especially in low-lying river deltas. A new study led by researchers at the University of Portsmouth, in partnership with Dhaka University and Curtin University, sheds light on how rising oceans are pushing saltwater into freshwater rivers and underground water sources in the world's largest river mouth -- the Bengal Delta in Bangladesh. Drawing on nearly two decades of data from over 50 monitoring stations in coastal Bangladesh, the team tracked a consistent rise in salt levels in rivers and estuaries, particularly since the mid-2000s. The western parts of the delta, already more prone to tidal influence, showed the fastest increases in salinity. The data suggests that the combination of sea-level rise, reduced freshwater flow, and increasingly frequent storm surges are all contributing to the inland movement and retention of saltwater. Since around 2007, many parts of the delta have experienced stepwise increases in salinity, often linked to powerful storms like Cyclone Sidr. These changes can devastate crops, erode food security, and force communities to move. While the analysis focused primarily on environmental data, it underscores how salinity intrusion is increasingly a threat to livelihoods, public health, and regional stability. The study, published in Ecological Indicators , uses one of the most detailed and long-running salinity datasets in any delta system worldwide. It applied advanced statistical methods to distinguish long-term trends from short-term weather or seasonal changes. The researchers introduced a new conceptual model called the Offshore Controlled Estuarine and Aquifer Nexus (OCEAN) framework, that highlights how offshore features like steep underwater slopes and restricted tidal flows can trap salt in low-lying coastal zones. Dr Mohammad Hoque from the University of Portsmouth's School of the Environment and Life Sciences: said: "What we're seeing in the Bengal Delta is not just a local crisis, it's a signal of what's coming for low-lying coastal areas around the world. "Salinity is rising faster and reaching farther inland than many people realise, and it's happening quietly with major consequences for water security, agriculture, and livelihoods. This study helps us understand the mechanics behind it, and underscores the urgency for coordinated, global action." The findings also show the limits of relying only on land-based solutions. Human interventions like embankments, riverbed alterations, and upstream dams have often made things worse by restricting freshwater flows. Meanwhile, offshore dynamics -- such as sediment build-up and ocean current shifts -- play a larger role than previously appreciated. Addressing the problem, therefore, requires integrated approaches that connect rivers, oceans, and climate systems. Coastal regions in California, including Los Angeles County and the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, are combating saltwater intrusion through innovative measures. In LA, freshwater is injected into aquifers to create hydraulic barriers against seawater. However, population growth and groundwater extraction continue to challenge these efforts. "While the focus is on Bangladesh, the study's implications are global," said Dr Sean Feist, former PhD researcher at the University of Portsmouth and now Scientific Officer at Test Valley Borough Council. "Coastal regions from the Mekong Delta in Vietnam to Louisiana's wetlands in the United States face similar pressures. As sea levels continue to rise, the risk of agricultural land turning salty, drinking water becoming undrinkable, and shallow groundwater becoming permanently brackish grows ever more serious." The paper recommends that similar long-term investigations into changing salinity levels be conducted in other vulnerable coastal regions around the world, particularly in low-lying deltas facing rising seas, reduced river flows, and increasing storm activity. Short-term datasets can often misrepresent the scale or pace of salinisation, while extended records offer a clearer picture of how saltwater intrusion evolves over time. Dr Ashraf Dewan from Curtin University said: "Ultimately, this study highlights that the creeping salinisation of deltas is a slow-moving but deeply disruptive force. Without urgent investment in salt-tolerant agriculture, better water storage, and strategic planning across entire river basins, the disruptive impacts of salinity are likely to intensify. The Bengal Delta is on the frontline of climate change, but it is not alone. The patterns observed here are emerging in many of the world's great coastal regions. What happens next depends on how quickly we respond."

Many property owners believe that it is the municipality's responsibility to ensure that their houses do not get flooded in heavy rain. However, in many countries, including Sweden, owner-responsibility is a cornerstone of the adaption governance, and property owners are recognized as a key actor for the adaption work. "We need to increase awareness that the property owner has an important role and that there's much that can be done that doesn't involve renovating the entire property," says Sofie Storbjörk, associate professor at the Department of Thematic Studies -- Environmental Change at Linköping University. Even large municipal property companies may be uncertain about how to go about preventive work. To find new ways of working, the research team has collaborated with four municipally owned companies in Sweden. These administer rental apartments or properties for various municipal activities in two medium-sized cities. In total, they are responsible for just over 2,300 buildings. The researchers' proposals are presented in an article in the journal Building Research and Innovation . Studying flood risk maps, the researchers found that many of the buildings were located in places with a high risk of rising water levels. This was the case for about half of the rental properties and one third of the buildings used for preschools, nursing homes and similar operations. The researchers carried out on-site inspections at 604 buildings to look for design weaknesses. Among other things, it turned out that one third had openings at ground level and that up to half of the inspected buildings were at risk of wastewater getting into the basement because there were no backflow valves. Many also had open holes or cracks in the foundations or the facade. The large number of problems made it difficult for housing companies to know how to proceed. The researchers then conducted several workshops with key actors to find new approaches. The participants had to make a list of the worst things that could happen in the case of a flood event. There were a limited number of points: injury to people, evacuation of tenants and damage to technical installations or other critical functions. These feared consequences were then linked to the weaknesses discovered in the buildings. Which of them would likely contribute to a worst-case scenario? This made it easier to prioritise the houses that should be worked on first and to assess which measures would have the best effect. But even among the large housing companies there was a perception that the municipalities bear the main responsibility for the preventive work. The researchers then helped to analyse what the property owners themselves have the power to carry out. It turned out to be a lot. For example, they can move key operations from the basement, install watertight doors, install backflow valves, raise entrance thresholds, make sure the ground slopes away from the building, and reduce the number of hard-paved surfaces. The researchers conclude that the best way to work is to start from the worst-case scenario and the weaknesses of the buildings concerned. They also think that it is important that both municipalities and the large housing companies are open about what measures they are taking. That would be very helpful for small property owners such as tenant-owned housing associations and homeowners. Another study published by the researchers in the journal Buildings shows, for example, that tenant-owned housing associations in Sweden greatly underestimate the risk of being affected by flooding, and that even those affected multiple times have not considered working preventively. A major contributing factor is ignorance. "It will be much, much clearer what you can do if housing companies and municipalities start to inform people of what they have done. Then, as a layperson, you can copy it," says Mattias Hjerpe, senior associate professor at the Department of Thematic Studies -- Environmental Change at Linköping University.

The researchers included more than 5 million measurements from individual trees across much of eastern North America and showed the rate at which introduced species are spreading has increased over the last two decades. Additionally, native tree diversity is on the decline in areas where exotic species originally introduced by humans have encroached. This might seem like a no-brainer. If you increase the number of non-native species, it makes sense that the number of natives would go down. But no one's actually demonstrated that this happens at a large scale before. "There's this assumption that introduced species are not a good thing, but we don't always know what that means," said study co-author Doug Soltis, a distinguished professor at the Florida Museum. "People have tried to get at their impact using fine-scale studies. What this paper does is take a more macro-level approach." There are numerous studies that catalogue the negative effects plants can have when they're introduced to a novel ecosystem. Without the pressures of pathogens and herbivores in the region where they evolved, they can quickly outcompete native species, change the pH of the soil, alter the growth and behavior of animals, disrupt the flow of nutrients from tree to tree through underground fungal networks, and make it easier for some species to move into an area while pushing others out by altering the environment. What we don't know is how all of these changes affect native plant diversity as a whole. To find out, the study authors left no stone unturned. Like a physician subjecting a patient to a barrage of clinical tests, they looked at changes in biological diversity over time in response to the arrival and establishment of non-native species. Using data collected as far back as 1995, the authors found two conspicuous patterns. First, introduced species are picking up speed rather than losing steam. Second, in areas with introduced species, the number of native species is decreasing over time. The diversity of introduced species in many areas is also increasing. This could be because certain areas are more amenable to the growth of non-natives; they could be close to metropolitan or suburban areas, for example, where exotic trees are grown as ornamentals. Or it could mean the arrival of one introduced species somehow makes way for others. "We don't actually know the mechanism behind the increase," said lead author Yunpeng Liu, a postdoctoral research associate at the University of Florida's Invasion Science Institute. The answer to that riddle will have to await further research. Despite a solid understanding of how introduced trees affect natives, the authors say they aren't any closer to finding a solution for the problem. The study of introduced species is primarily focused on mitigation and prevention rather than the full-scale restoration of ecosystems. Once Pandora's box has been opened, it's practically impossible to corral the furies. "We can't eradicate species once they've become widespread," Liu said. But studies like these are valuable nonetheless for the simple reason that a problem can't be solved unless it's first identified. Large-scale and long-term datasets like the Forest Inventory and Analysis Program of the USDA provides directions for the unknown road ahead. People doing the hard work of removing introduced species and planting natives -- as co-authors Pam and Doug Soltis are doing with a tract of forest at the University of Florida that has been granted a temporary stay from development -- need to know where to look and focus their efforts. "What we can offer is a risk map," Yunpeng said. "We can tell people which region or ecosystem they should pay more attention to in the future." Case study: Tallow tree, "a most useful plant." Tallow trees ( Triadica sebifera ) have spade-shaped leaves with much of the same visual appeal as a gaudy flower. In spring, the new leaves grow out crimson and give way to kelly green as they mature. Near the end of the growing season, the leaves are flushed with anthocyanins that turn them ruby red with bronze veins and a halo of dappled sunset yellows. They have actual flowers, too, which hang down in long racemes that look like elephant trunks attached to the tip of each branch. When the fruit is ready for dispersal, an outer woody layer splits and falls away, revealing three seeds coated in a thick, waxy layer of tallow that can be harvested to make candles and soap. The seeds also contain a type of oil that hardens when exposed to air. Unlike water, oils don't evaporate but instead go through a process called polymerization, a chemical transformation that results in a solid. Tallow tree oils polymerize quickly, making them useful for oil-based paints and varnishes. The tree, which can grow up to 50 feet tall, also has an elegant profile, with a wide, flowing canopy that looks like it was draped in a sheet of leaves rather than growing them itself. Tallow trees are native to Asia, where they've been cultivated for hundreds of years. With all of its pleasing and useful attributes, it's little wonder the species was imported to North America. In fact, the first tallow tree seeds were shipped over by none other than Benjamin Franklin. In a letter dated 1772, he wrote: "I send also a few seeds of the Chinese tallow tree, which will I believe grow and thrive with you. 'Tis a most useful plant." Franklin shipped the seeds to a man in Georgia. By 1784, they were spotted growing near Charleston, South Carolina. Young tallow trees can grow as much as 13 feet a year, allowing them to outcompete slower-growing native flora for light and space. They can also grow in a variety of environments, including flood plains and dry uplands, deep shade and full sun, giving them the potential to spread widely. Tallow trees are now considered one of the most invasive plant species in the United States, with a primarily coastal distribution from North Carolina through Texas, as well as naturalized populations in California. But their current pervasiveness isn't all Franklin's fault. In the early 1900s, the U.S. Department of Agriculture incentivized growing tallow trees in the Southeast with the goal of creating a soap industry in the region. Even when the incentive was gone, local nurseries continued to grow and sell tallow trees as ornamentals. As many as 300,000 were grown in Houston during the 1980s. The species was also introduced to California as a shade tree. Many birds eat tallow tree fruit and disperse the seeds, making it easy for the plant to escape cultivation and infiltrate natural areas, where it can radically and rapidly alter ecosystems. A stark example of this comes from Southeast Texas, to which tallow trees were first introduced in the early 19th century. Initially, they spread primarily through riparian landscapes, following the course of rivers and streams. Then, beginning in the 1970s, they moved onto higher ground. Before Houston, Galveston and the surrounding areas were developed or converted to farmland, they were covered with vast prairies. The area received sufficient rainfall to support forests, but the soil is composed primarily of thick, cloying clay that makes it difficult for plants to absorb water and nutrients. Grasses like little bluestem were among the only plants that grew there, and wildfires were common. Thus, any trees that could withstand the infertile soil were periodically cleared away by conflagrations. But this didn't stop tallow trees. After building up a robust seed bank in the nearby riparian zones, they quickly and efficiently went about converting prairies into woodlands made primarily of tallow trees. They're also good at taking over dormant pastures, and their spread was likely facilitated by abandoned farm and ranch lands, which lay fallow as agriculture declined in the region and properties were earmarked for development. Once invasive species become established, they also make subtle changes to the environment that scientists are only now beginning to understand. Tallow leaves are relatively thin compared with some native trees in temperate North American forests. If they happen to fall in a body of water, such as a pond or a lake, bacteria rapidly begin breaking down the leaves, digesting their sugars and tannins, and using up dissolved oxygen in the water during the process. This has been shown to reduce the hatching success and tadpole survival of southern leopard frogs in laboratory settings. Gray tree frogs also seem to avoid making mating calls in tallow trees, preferring the natives instead, which would become problematic in places where tallows are the main type of woody vegetation. Replacing an entire ecosystem, whether through development or the introduction of non-native species, also displaces organisms that cannot withstand the transition. This is the case for Attwater's prairie-chicken, which is listed as federally endangered and lives exclusively in the disappearing coastal plains of Texas. The study was published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Samuel Scheiner, Aaron Hogan of the USDA Forest Service, Matthew Thomas and Jeremy Lichstein of the University of Florida and Robert Guralnick of the Florida Museum were also co-authors of the study. Funding for the study was provided in part by the National Science Foundation, the USDA Forest Service and the University of Florida.

New research published today by Vermont scientists shows how an already-existing computer system -- the federal government's National Water Model -- can be modified, with AI and real-time data from sensors, to go beyond simply forecasting stream flow -- to predicting water quality too. "This new tool can be implemented across the country and broadly utilized by folks that could use water quality forecasts in any number of applications," said UVM's Andrew Schroth, the study's lead researcher. "With the first ever application of the National Water Model to predict water quality, we've opened a new window that can really benefit the country as a whole moving forward." To test the tool in real-world conditions, the researchers focused on New York City's water supply, an ideal testing ground due to the city's extensive network of sensors that monitor water flow and sediment -- and the episodic nature of the problem that the NYC water supply faces. New York City's Water Supply Publishing their findings in the Journal of the American Water Resources Association , the team tested the new tool in New York State's Esopus Creek catchment in the Catskill Mountains. This waterway drains into the Ashokan Reservoir, which supplies approximately 40% of New York City's daily drinking water and is part of the largest unfiltered water supply network in the country. A key concern for reservoir water quality is turbidity, a measure of water clarity affected by sediment and other material in the water column. When certain levels are exceeded, the NYC DEP must limit the supply from that reservoir, impacting the management and operations of the entire downstream network. The capacity to forecast high turbidity threats is critical for streamlining water supply operations. "When too much sediment comes into the reservoir during or after big storms, New York City has to limit supply and modify their operations," says Schroth, a Research Associate Professor in the University of Vermont's Department of Geography and Geosciences. He notes that Esopus Creek is prone to high turbidity due to high amounts of fine grain sediment from the glacial clays, silts, and gravels in the valley. When storms occur, stream banks erode, cutting into the glacial sediment and creating an elevated cloudiness which may linger for months, complicating forecasts and reservoir management. National Applicability Using New York City as a test case, researchers supported by the Cooperative Institute for Research to Operations in Hydrology (CIROH), a partnership based at the University of Alabama and supported by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Geological Survey, are working to apply the National Water Model beyond hydrologic forecasting. According to the National Weather Service, "the National Water Model is a hydrologic modeling framework that simulates observed and forecast streamflow over the continental United States." The National Water Model allows anyone to access the data, giving users the ability to see how streams or creeks are impacted in the event of heavy rainfall, and if flooding can be expected. CIROH researchers nationwide are advancing innovative applications of the model to improve awareness of water availability and threats. The newly published research, led by UVM scientist, Dr. Andrew Schroth, and Utah State University scientist, Dr. John Kemper, in collaboration with UVM engineer, Dr. Kristen Underwood, NYC Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) geologist, Dany Davis, and U.S. Geological Survey scientists, focuses on using AI to combine the extensive datasets from the National Water Model with sensor datasets that collect data from streams in frequent intervals. By leveraging the relationship between the flow of water and concentration of sediment, the team was able to develop a robust forecast for water quality measurements. Across the United States, this tool can have widespread applications, allowing locations that typically face various water quality issues to better predict threats. If a water treatment plant has been implementing water quality monitoring, they now have the potential for real time capacity to understand how an upcoming storm will affect the water quality, giving them greater predictability in plant operation closures. Likewise, if an algal bloom is predicted with a storm onset, authorities will be aware of this water quality threat, closing down beaches for public health concerns. From an agricultural standpoint, farmers would know how much water is anticipated and what would be wet, guiding their use of fertilizer application. Kemper, who hails from Maryland and recently completed a post-doctoral fellowship at the University of Vermont before a move to Utah, acknowledges the impact of the work. "Turning a streamflow forecasting tool into a water quality forecasting tool paves the way for increasingly available forecasts to serve community needs," creating water quality forecasts for communities and informing similar strategies for managing turbidity in basins worldwide. The model will set a precedent for studying other water quality components, extending far beyond New York City. The framework developed by the team has national applicability, as it can be adapted nationwide, allowing water plant operators and other managers to learn about their water quality constituent of interest, such as phosphorus, nitrogen, nitrate, turbidity, or chloride. This new model can transform how water quality can be anticipated and managed across the nation.

Global warming is already reshaping our daily lives, with storms, floods, wildfires and droughts around the world. As temperatures continue to rise, a third of global food production could be at risk. Now, a new study in Nature Food offers a more precise picture of exactly where and how warming will affect our ability to grow food. Researchers at Aalto University studied how future changes in temperature, precipitation and aridity will affect growing conditions of 30 major food crop species across the globe. They found that low-latitude regions face significantly worse consequences than mid- or high-latitudes. Depending on the level of warming, up to half of the crop production in low-latitude areas would be at risk as climate conditions become unsuitable for production. At the same time, those regions would also see a large drop in crop diversity. 'The loss of diversity means that the range of food crops available for cultivation could decrease significantly in certain areas. That would reduce food security and make it more difficult to get adequate calories and protein,' says Sara Heikonen, the doctoral researcher who led the study. Up to half of the world's food crop production may be affected Warming will severely decrease the amount of global cropland available for staple crops -- rice, maize, wheat, potato and soybean -- which account for over two-thirds of the world's food energy intake . In addition, 'tropical root crops such as yam, which are key to food security in low-income regions, as well as cereals and pulses are particularly vulnerable. In sub-Saharan Africa, the region which would be impacted most, almost three quarters of current production is at risk if global warming exceeds 3°C,' Heikonen says. By contrast, mid- and high-latitude areas will probably retain their productive land overall, though zones for specific crops will change. These areas are also likely to see an increase in crop diversity. 'For example, the cultivation of temperate fruits, such as pears, could become more common in more northerly regions,' says Heikonen. However, even if climatic conditions are favourable, other factors could hamper agriculture in these areas, says the study's senior author, Professor Matti Kummu. 'We showed that there's climatic potential but, for example, warming might bring new pests and extreme weather events, which our model doesn't include. So the situation isn't really that black and white.' Options for adaptation and mitigation Many of the low-latitude regions threatened most by warming are already vulnerable in numerous ways. They face problems with food sufficiency, and economic and systemic forces make them less resilient than northern countries. Nevertheless, Kummu sees ways that these regions could, at least partly, meet the challenge. 'In many low latitude areas, especially in Africa, the yields are small compared to similar areas elsewhere in the world. They could get higher yields with access to fertilisers and irrigation as well as reducing food losses through the production and storage chain. However, ongoing global warming will add a lot of uncertainty to these estimates and probably even more actions are needed, such as crop selection and novel breeding,' he says. 'But I always say that the modelling and analysis is the easy part -- understanding how to make the changes happen is the hardest part.' While policy-makers in low-latitude countries should work to close those gaps, in mid- and high-latitude regions farmers and policy-makers need more flexibility, says Kummu. Warming will likely change which crops are grown in those areas, and further changes will come from the array of pressures on the global food system. Coping with those changes will require the ability to adjust and adapt as the consequences of climate change unfold. 'If we want to secure our food system in the future, we need to both mitigate climate change and adapt to its effects,' says Heikonen. 'Even if the biggest changes are in equatorial regions, we will all feel the effects through the globalised food system. We need to act together to address these problems.'

In a research project funded by the Research Council of Finland entitled Sustainable Livelihoods and Politics at the Margins: Environmental Displacement in South Asia , researchers Sirpa Tenhunen, Mohammad Jasim Udd and Dayabati Roy have prepared recommendations for developing sustainable livelihoods in coastal areas where fragile mangrove forests occur. Climate change will increase the intensity and frequency of tropical cyclones in the region and raise sea levels, increasing salinity and threatening settlement in the most vulnerable areas. However, land level fluctuations are nothing new in this estuary, as the Sundarbans have been and continue to be shaped by the silt carried by rivers from the Himalayan mountains. Strips of land are constantly rising from the shore, while elsewhere they are being submerged. The report makes the following main recommendations for promoting sustainable development in mangrove forest areas: Regulation and control to shrimp farming The researchers recommend addressing many of the vulnerabilities of coastal communities. These include the uncontrolled expansion of shrimp farming that threatens the fragile ecosystem and livelihoods of the region. As shrimp farms are established on agricultural land, they are taking over from the most labour-intensive livelihoods, with mangrove forests among those areas being cleared for shrimp farms. The salty water that is piped into shrimp farms makes the land unsuitable for farming, while the chemicals used in the farms pollute the environment. The researchers also recommend regulation and control of shrimp farming. Instead of relocating populations, which is difficult to implement, they propose supporting environmentally friendly livelihoods in the area. An example of these would be freshwater harvesting and the associated fish farming and cultivation. On lands where the salinity levels are low it is possible to grow salt-tolerant crops. Many inhabitants already earn their living by harvesting forest products without damaging the forests. These livelihoods should not be discouraged in forest conservation. Ecotourism and agroforestry also offer sustainable livelihoods. Support schemes for residents should allow mobility, as many residents combine paid work in the city with their rural livelihoods. Storm shelters, floodwalls and levees to protect residents from storms Storm shelters, floodwalls and levees play a key role in protecting residents from storms. These vital infrastructures need to be maintained and managed in partnership with local communities. The corruption associated with infrastructure construction and the distribution of government benefits must be limited through monitoring and awareness-raising.

The 2024 Global Water Monitor Report, involving an international team of researchers and led by ANU Professor Albert van Dijk, found rising temperatures are changing the way water moves around the planet, "wreaking havoc" on the water cycle. "Rising sea surface temperatures intensified tropical cyclones and droughts in the Amazon Basin and southern Africa. Global warming also contributed to heavier downpours and slower-moving storms, as evidenced by deadly flash floods in Europe, Asia and Brazil," Professor van Dijk said. In 2024, about four billion people across 111 countries -- half of the world's population − experienced their warmest year yet. Professor van Dijk said air temperatures over land in 2024 were 1.2 degrees Celsius warmer than at the start of the century, and about 2.2 degrees Celsius higher than at the start of the Industrial Revolution. "In 2024, Earth experienced its hottest year on record, for the fourth year in a row. Water systems across the globe bore the brunt," he said. "2024 was a year of extremes but was not an isolated occurrence. It is part of a worsening trend of more intense floods, prolonged droughts, and record-breaking extremes." The most damaging water-related disasters in 2024 included flash floods, river floods, droughts, tropical cyclones and landslides. Water-related disasters killed more than 8,700 people, displaced 40 million people and caused economic losses exceeding US $550 billion. "From historic droughts to catastrophic floods, these extreme events impact lives, livelihoods, and entire ecosystems. Separate, heavy rainfall events caused widespread flash flooding in Afghanistan and Pakistan, killing more than 1,000 people," Professor van Dijk said. "Catastrophic flooding in Brazil caused more than 80 deaths, with the region recording more than 300 millimetres of rainfall. "We found rainfall records are being broken with increasing regularity. For example, record-high monthly rainfall totals were achieved 27 per cent more frequently in 2024 than at the start of this century, whereas daily rainfall records were achieved 52 per cent more frequently. Record-lows were 38 per cent more frequent, so we are seeing worse extremes on both sides. "In southern China, the Yangtze and Pearl Rivers flooded cities and towns, displacing tens of thousands of people and causing hundreds of millions of dollars in crop damages. "In Bangladesh in August, heavy monsoon rains and dam releases in August caused widespread river flooding. More than 5.8 million people were affected and at least one million tonnes of rice was destroyed. In Spain, more than 500 millimetres of rain fell within eight hours in late October, causing deadly flash floods." While some parts of the world experienced major flooding in 2024, others endured crippling drought. "In the Amazon Basin, one of the Earth's most important ecosystems, record low river levels cut off transport routes and disrupted hydropower generation. Wildfires driven by the hot and dry weather burned through more than 52,000 square kilometres in September alone, releasing vast amounts of greenhouse gases," Professor van Dijk said. "In southern Africa, a severe drought reduced maize production by more than 50 per cent, leaving 30 million people facing food shortages. Farmers were forced to cull livestock as pastures dried up. The drought also reduced hydropower output, leading to widespread blackouts. "We need to prepare and adapt to inevitably more severe extreme events. That can mean stronger flood defences, developing more drought-resilient food production and water supplies, and better early warning systems. "Water is our most critical resource, and its extremes -- both floods and droughts -- are among the greatest threats we face." The research team used data from thousands of ground stations and satellites orbiting the Earth to deliver near real-time insights into critical water variables such as rainfall, soil moisture, river flows, and flooding. The Global Water Monitor is a collaboration between institutions across the world and involves various public and private organisations. The 2024 report is available on the Global Water Monitor website.

"We're in a race against time," explained Silvia Restrepo, president of the Boyce Thompson Institute (BTI) and one of the paper's co-authors. "The crops we depend on for food are increasingly struggling to survive extreme weather, from heat waves to droughts and floods. Meanwhile, our current approaches to developing tougher, more resilient crops simply aren't moving fast enough." The problem is complex: Not only are crops battling higher temperatures, but they're also facing more frequent pest outbreaks and diseases. Even when plants survive these challenges, climate change can reduce their nutritional value. Adding to the urgency, agriculture itself contributes to about 26% of global greenhouse gas emissions, creating a vicious cycle. The researchers outline five key recommendations to address this crisis: One of the paper's most striking observations is that despite agriculture's crucial role in human survival, only about 4% of global climate funding (roughly $35 billion annually) goes toward developing climate-resilient food systems. Even more concerning, most of this research focuses on large-scale farming in developed nations, leaving smaller farms and developing countries behind. "We need to completely rethink how we approach this challenge," said co-author Andrew Nelson, an associate professor at BTI. "Instead of starting in the lab and hoping solutions work in the field, we should begin by understanding farmers' real-world challenges and then work backward to develop practical solutions." The researchers emphasize that success will require unprecedented collaboration between scientists, farmers, policymakers, and the public. They also stress the importance of making new technologies accessible to all regions, particularly in the Global South, where climate impacts are often felt most severely. As climate change continues to accelerate, the paper's authors argue that the time for incremental changes has passed. By decisively implementing the five recommendations outlined above, we can create agricultural systems that are resilient to the impacts of climate change while also improving food security and nutrition. The group of 21 co-authors from nine countries was formed as a result of the First International Summit on Plant Resilience, organized by the Plant Resilience Institute earlier this year. The keynote speaker was co-author Michelle Heck, adjunct professor at BTI and Cornell University and Research Molecular Biologist at USDA-ARS, who spoke about her innovative research to prevent citrus greening disease. The summit promoted global collaboration, bringing together leading plant scientists from diverse disciplines. Together, they developed a roadmap to establish plant resilience research as a cornerstone of global climate change solutions. A follow-up summit is planned for 2026.

"The network of canals was designed to channel annual flood waters into source ponds for fish trapping and would have yielded enough fish to feed as many as 15,000 people year-round, conservatively," said Eleanor Harrison-Buck, professor of anthropology and director of the Belize River East Archaeology (BREA) project. "The dates indicate that the fisheries were initially constructed by Late Archaic hunter-gatherer-fishers and continued to be used by their Formative Maya descendants (approximately 2000 BCE to 200 CE). For Mesoamerica in general, we tend to regard agricultural production as the engine of civilization, but this study tells us that it wasn't just agriculture -- it was also potential mass harvesting of aquatic species." Published in the journal Science Advances, the research used 26 radiocarbon dates from test excavation sites in the CTWS, which indicate that such landscape-scale wetland enhancements may have been an adaptive response to long-term climate disturbance recorded in Mesoamerica between 2200 and 1900 BCE. "The early dates for the canals surprised us initially because we all assumed these massive constructions were built by the ancient Maya living in the nearby city centers," said Harrison-Buck. "However, after running numerous radiocarbon dates, it became clear they were built much earlier." Sediment samples were collected along the walls of the excavation units and sequenced for specific elements, such as nitrogen and carbon, to look for environmental changes over time. The sediment showed a strong tropical forest dominance during that period and no evidence of crop cultivation, specifically maize. Along with a lack of any pollen from domesticated crops, there were not any signs of ditched and drained agricultural fields in the immediate area dating to that time. The multiproxy data gathered suggests the distinctive long linear zigzag channels served primarily as large-scale fish-trapping facilities. "It seems likely that the canals allowed for annual fish harvests and social gatherings, which would have encouraged people to return to this area year after year and congregate for longer periods of time," said Marieka Brouwer Burg, professor of anthropology at the University of Vermont and BREA co-director. "Such intensive investments in the landscape may have led ultimately to the development of the complex society characteristic of the pre-Columbian Maya civilization, which subsequently occurred in this area by around 1200 BCE." "Wetlands have always been a critical ecosystem for humans across the globe," said Samantha Krause, professor of geography and environmental studies at Texas State University. "Knowing how to manage wetland resources responsibly is essential for the continued resilience of these ecosystems both in the past and today. The Archaic hunter-gatherer-fishers knew how to protect their resources and use them in a way that could sustain these habitats, not exhaust them, which explains their long-lasting occupation in this area." With the support of the local community, the team plans to return to Crooked Tree to investigate a larger sample of these landscape-scale modifications that they have identified across a broad area of northern Belize, hoping to more fully understand the complexity of human-wetland interactions in the past. Other co-authors include Mark Willis, department of archaeology, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia; Angelina Perrotti, Palynology & Environmental Archaeology Research Lab; Monona, Wisconsin; and Katie Bailey, department of anthropology, University of Vermont. This research was funded by a grant from the Alphawood Foundation Chicago. Additional support was provided by a collaborative research grant from the National Science Foundation. The Belize Institute of Archaeology provided an archaeological permit, granting permission to excavate in the Crooked Tree Wildlife Sanctuary. The Crooked Tree Village Council welcomed the research team and permitted them to map and excavate in the wetlands around their community.

The study, published today (Nov. 18) in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , analyzed data from 430 rivers across the U.S. and found that phosphorus loss from agricultural lands has increased over the past four decades, despite efforts to reduce it. This loss of phosphorus can potentially lead to decreased crop yields, which could drive up the cost of food, the researchers explained. "We've seen from recent weather events that water quantity, the amount of water that storms and waterways carry, can lead to dangerous flooding and mudslides," said Li Li, professor of civil and environmental engineering at Penn State and corresponding author on the study. "What we wanted to understand is what happens to the land when these storms pull the subsurface of the soil into rivers and streams. What we found is an alarming loss of this finite element that lets soil sustain life." Phosphorus plays an essential role in various biological processes, like creating DNA structure and facilitating the energy transfer between cells, Li explained. But unlike nitrogen, another critical soil nutrient, phosphorus is a non-renewable resource with limited geological deposits, meaning that once it moves from land to water, it can't get back into the land. "This is a problem for many reasons," Li said. "When it's lost from farmland, it can reduce crop yields, potentially leading to higher food prices. Then, when phosphorus enters our waterways, it can cause harmful algal blooms that can make water unsafe for swimming and fishing -- and can even reduce oxygen levels in water and kill fish and other aquatic life. It also makes it more expensive to treat drinking water, which means higher water bills for all of us." The study used a sophisticated deep learning model to analyze four decades of data, from 1980 to 2019, from 430 rivers throughout the contiguous United States. It revealed that while 60% of the rivers studied showed declining levels of phosphorus, the overall amount of phosphorus flowing into rivers has increased. Agricultural areas are the biggest contributors to the problem, with phosphorus levels increasing in most rivers near agricultural areas, even as they decline in rivers near urban areas. "This suggests that efforts to control phosphorus pollution from sources like agricultural runoff are not as effective as we thought," Li said. "But declining levels of phosphorus, particularly in rivers flowing through urban areas, suggests that efforts to control phosphorus pollution from point sources such as wastewater treatment plants are working." Despite these targeted efforts, Li said the overall increased amount of phosphorus flowing into rivers is due to the increased frequency of extreme weather events that lead to heavier rainfall and higher river flows -- with that increased flow comes more phosphorus. "This means that even though we're doing a better job at limiting phosphorus pollution from urban areas, the problem is getting worse overall, due to factors largely beyond the control of just one region," Li said. "This is a problem that is tied to climate change." Going forward, the study's authors said phosphorus pollution from agriculture needs better prevention and mitigation, which will be a challenge, especially as wetter storms drive increased rainfall and river flows. They said that this will likely require a combination of new technologies and changes to farming practices. One such technology was invented at Penn State and is currently garnering support from the agricultural technology sector to address the problem at scale. Hunter Swisher, a 2016 Penn State alumnus, is the founder and chief executive officer of Phospholutions, a fertilizer formulated to increase phosphorus efficiency in the soil. He developed the company's technology during his undergraduate studies in plant sciences at Penn State. The company recently announced the results of a study proving that the product reduces runoff potential by 78% compared to conventional phosphorus fertilizers. Phospholutions is actively commercializing throughout the Americas, Europe and India. "We are advocating for more innovation, more creativity and more urgency," Li said. "The connection between water and land is essential and that balance is growing increasingly fragile." Other Penn State authors are Wei Zhi, former assistant research professor of civil and environmental engineering at Penn State and currently a professor in Hohai University in China; Jiangtao Liu, a doctoral student in civil and environmental engineering; Elizabeth Boyer, professor of environmental science; Chaopeng Shen, professor of water resources engineering; and Xiaofeng Liu, associate professor of civil engineering. Other authors are Hubert Baniecki of University of Warsaw in Poland and Gary Shenk of the United States Geological Survey. This work was supported by the Barry and Shirley Isett Professorship at Penn State, the High Performance Computing Platform of Hohai University, the U.S. National Science Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy and the Polish Ministry of Education and Science.

Mining a 30-year database from 16 Extension weed science programs (including Illinois Extension) across the U.S. Corn Belt, the researchers found variable weather significantly reduces the effectiveness of three leading POST herbicides against major weeds affecting corn and soybean. And if farmers can't adequately control weeds with PRE or POST herbicides, corn and soybean yields -- and global food security -- will suffer. "Weather doesn't just matter in the hours after POST application, as other studies have shown. Our analysis showed air temperature and precipitation were linked with herbicide effectiveness days before and after application for the products and weeds we studied," said Chris Landau, postdoctoral researcher for USDA-ARS and first author on the paper. "With the sheer amount of data we analyzed -- thousands and thousands of data points, including a broad range of weather conditions over 30 years -- we were able to characterize the effects of weather on POST herbicide efficacy on a much broader range of environments than previous studies." The analysis showed average air temperatures below 66 or above 77 degrees Fahrenheit made fomesafen, glyphosate, and mesotrione -- representing three herbicide sites of action -- less effective on waterhemp, giant foxtail, and morning-glory species. The historical dataset couldn't explain why weeds were less responsive to the herbicides under these conditions, but other studies provide clues. "If it's excessively warm before application -- and water is not limiting -- weed growth speeds up, resulting in larger plants that may have a better chance of surviving the herbicide," said co-author Marty Williams, an ecologist with USDA-ARS and affiliate professor in the Department of Crop Sciences, part of the College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences at Illinois. "Likewise, a hot period after application could supercharge plant metabolism and neutralize the herbicide faster, rendering it less effective." Cold temperatures have essentially the opposite effect, slowing metabolism and movement of herbicides within the plant and rendering them less effective. Herbicide applicators don't just need to pay attention to air temperature, however. The analysis found precipitation patterns -- particularly dry conditions in the 10 days before application or wet conditions 10 days after application -- also affected herbicide effectiveness. Again, Landau points to previous research to explain why dry or rainy conditions might prime weeds to be less responsive to herbicides. For example, drought prompts plants to thicken the waxy cuticle layer on leaf surfaces. That helps plants avoid water loss, but it also makes it harder for foliar-applied herbicides to get in. Wet conditions could not only wash herbicides off leaf surfaces in the hours after application; excess precipitation in the days after application could trigger stress responses, leading to slower growth and reduced movement of herbicides to target sites within the plant. "Farmers are already dealing with serious challenges due to climate change, such as spring flooding and summer droughts. When you consider that the tools used to combat weeds are also affected by these weather patterns, farming becomes that much more difficult," Williams said. While much of the analysis focused on the effects of single herbicides, the team also analyzed the combination of glyphosate and fomesafen. Weed control was more robust with the combined application across variable weather conditions, but the researchers warn that POST combinations alone won't guarantee full control. Landau recommends layering in effective soil-applied residual herbicides and non-chemical tactics to provide more consistent weed control. Williams adds that weed science as a discipline needs to invest in new tools. "Collectively, weeds are adapting quicker than our ways to manage them. Climate change appears poised to put this evolution on a faster track," he said. "We hope it's possible to get ahead of the issue of failing weed control on the research and development side, because the cost of waiting until everything fails could be painful."

"The conventional wisdom was that it could take several weeks to years for nitrates to move from the crop root zones to reach groundwater," said corresponding author Isaya Kisekka, a professor in the Departments of Land, Air and Water Resources and Biological and Agricultural Engineering. "We found these extreme events, such as California's atmospheric rivers, are going to move nitrate more quickly." In this study, different methods were used to measure how much nitrate, a component of nitrogen fertilizer, was seeping down through the soil in a tomato and cucumber crop near Esparto, California. Scientists conducted their research from 2021 until 2023 when California was experiencing periods of drought followed by atmospheric rivers. They measured nitrate during both the growing seasons and the rainy seasons. Drought can leave more nitrogen in soil Previous studies have shown about 40% of nitrogen fertilizer used for vegetables isn't absorbed by the plants but remains in the soil. During droughts, crops don't use nitrogen efficiently, leading to excess nitrogen in the soil. This study found that if a drought is then followed by heavy rainfall, that sudden burst of water causes nitrate to seep in groundwater more quickly. The nitrate concentration in the shallow groundwater exceeded the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency maximum contaminant level of 10 milligrams per liter for drinking water. "In California, we often say we swing between droughts and floods," said Kisekka. "These extreme events that come with climate change are going to make the risk of these chemicals ending up in our drinking water much more severe." Groundwater is the primary source of drinking water for most of California's Central Valley. In some regions, such as the Tulare Lake Basin, nearly one-third of drinking and irrigation wells exceed the EPA's safe nitrate level. High nitrate levels in drinking water can increase health risks, especially for young children. It may also increase the risk of colorectal cancer. Need for real-time soil nitrate monitoring Central Valley farmers are required to report to the Regional Water Board how much nitrogen they applied to their field and how much was removed as part of the crop's yield. The study compared different ways of monitoring when nitrate from fertilizers seep into groundwater. Kisekka said the results highlight the need for affordable, real-time soil nitrate monitoring tools to help farmers manage fertilizer use efficiently. By using conservation practices that limit leftover nitrates in the crop's root zone after harvest, farmers can help reduce nitrate contamination in groundwater. This study's data will also help improve a model called SWAT, which is used to track nitrate seepage into groundwater across California's Central Valley. This effort is part of the Central Valley Water Board's program to regulate irrigated farmlands. Other UC Davis authors include Iael Raij Hoffman, Thomas Harter and Helen Dahlke. The study was supported by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service through its Conservation Effects Assessment Project. The national project is designed to assess the effectiveness of conservation practices across different watersheds. The study also had support from the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture.

This new chromosome-scale reference genome published in Scientific Data offers new potential to accelerate modern breeding of this underutilised legume for climate-smart agriculture. Nearly twice the size of the human genome, the sequence was assembled from scratch and improves on an earlier draft assembly of the vigorous grass pea line LS007. "We want to establish this new genome sequence as the reference genome for the grass pea community, and we're delighted to share this valuable resource for other scientists to use and learn about grass pea," explained corresponding author of the research Dr Peter Emmrich, a researcher at Norwich Institute for Sustainable Development (NISD) and visiting group leader at the John Innes Centre. "At a time of increasing weather shocks, this genome allows us to unlock the secrets of grass pea's resilience, to further improve this crop for farmers, and inform development of other crops, such as peas," he added. Improvements in genome accuracy and completeness also allow researchers to study evolutionary links between species, helping identify gene pathways that could be used to improve the crop or to understand its remarkable drought tolerance. Dr Anne Edwards, research assistant at the John Innes Centre, said: "As we prepare for a future of increased climate change, we are going to need crops that can cope with drought, or flooding or inundations of salt water. This new genome sequence means that we are even closer to adding grass pea to the list of climate-smart crops of tomorrow. It's an exciting time to be in the grass pea research community!" What is Grass Pea? Grass pea is a crop grown in many regions of the world that is high in protein and resilient to drought and flooding. One of the oldest known cultivated plants, grass pea is now grown in Ethiopia, Eritrea, India, Bangladesh, and Nepal. It has been used for centuries as an insurance crop, that survives when other crops fail and is safe to eat as part of a balanced diet. Grass pea is among a group neglected and underutilised crops that play a key role in local nutrition and livelihoods, but that historically have received little attention from breeders and researchers. However, its resilience to both drought and flooding makes it a promising crop for ensuring food security in a changing climate. Grass pea's widespread cultivation has been hampered due to a toxin contained within its seeds and shoots, which can, in malnourished people, cause the disease neurolathyrism, a condition which causes irreversible paralysis. Another major barrier preventing crop breeding improvements was the lack of a genome reference for the crop. The availability of the new genome sequence means researchers could use gene editing and modern breeding methods to develop varieties of grass pea with improved agronomic characteristics or low or zero toxin content. This means that grass pea could be poised to make an important contribution to a more diversified and climate resilient food system in the future.

At U of A's Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research, Trouet studies tree-rings to gather clues about what past climates were like, reading wavy, wooden lines like a linguist might decipher an ancient text. What if, she mused, the key to understanding the capricious summers in Europe could be hidden in trees, silent witnesses to centuries of warm and cold, sunshine, rain and snow? Trouet assembled an international collaboration to collect tree-ring samples across Europe. The team published its results -- the first reconstruction of the jet stream over the past 700 years -- on Tuesday in the journal Nature . The jet stream and the Black Death Jet streams are concentrated bands of wind in the upper atmosphere that travel around the globe in the northern and southern hemispheres. Their exact locations are not fixed; in response to changes in the position and intensity of high- and low-pressure weather systems, they may shift north or south or change their course, resembling a swiftly running stream at some times, and a slow, meandering river at others. The jet stream, it turns out, largely determines summer climate in Europe, and it does so in a seesaw-type pattern that climate researchers call a "dipole." "When the jet stream is in an extreme northern position, we get cooler and wetter conditions over the British Isles and warmer and drier conditions over the Mediterranean and the Balkans," explained study co-author Ellie Broadman, a former postdoctoral research fellow at Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research who is now a biologist at the Sequoia-Kings Canyon Field Station of the U.S. Geological Survey . "This is related to the climate conditions we are witnessing right now, such as catastrophic flooding in central Europe." Hotter conditions over the Balkans cause more moisture than normal to evaporate from the Mediterranean Sea and rain down further north. Conversely, when the jet stream migrates further south, it drags warmer and drier air over the British Isles and pushes cooler temperatures and more moisture toward southeastern Europe. Measurements of the jet stream have only been around since the late 1940s, Trouet said. By using tree-ring samples from across Europe as proxies for temperature, the research team was able to reconstruct jet stream variation over the past 700 years. Each year, trees add a ring consisting of less dense wood in the spring and denser wood in the summer. By analyzing tree rings under the microscope, dendrochronologists can compile an archive of past climates. "We link tiny, subcellular cell wall features in the wood to atmospheric winds that weave through the atmosphere many miles above the Earth, which is fascinating," Trouet said. Remarkably, the team found past patterns of the jet stream reflected on a societal level, recorded in historic documents. "Europe has a long history of writing things down," Trouet said. "For example, there were monks in Ireland who started recording storms that happened in the 600s, the early Middle Ages, and you have centuries-long records of grape harvests, grain prices and epidemics." By comparing historical records to the jet stream reconstruction, Trouet's team discovered that the climate dipole created by the jet stream has influenced European society for the past 700 years and likely much longer. "Epidemics happened more frequently in the British Isles when the jet stream was further north," Trouet said. "Because summers were wet and cold, people stayed indoors, and the conditions were more conducive to spreading diseases." From 1348 to 1350, the plague, known as the Black Death, raged in Ireland. At that time, the jet stream was in an extreme, far-north position over Europe. The findings provide critical data to improve climate models that researchers rely on to predict future climate, Broadman said. Much research has focused on how the jet stream is affected as a result of global warming. "It's hard to do that if you only have 60 years' worth of data, which is why a reconstruction going back 700 years is very useful," she said. "It allows you to actually compare the past to what's been happening since we started putting greenhouse gasses into the atmosphere." Harvest failures, wildfires and extreme weather Scientists have observed a trend showing the jet stream is gradually shifting northward, independent of its seasonal or more short-term variations. "When you combine our reconstruction with harvest failures, you see that this trend likely leads to issues with major cereal crops and other types of weather extremes," Trouet said. "It gives you a preview of the kinds of extreme events and societal outcomes we could expect if that trajectory continues." The findings also set a precedent for a future trajectory of jet stream variation and extreme weather events, such as wildfires, Trouet said. "We showed that wildfires in the Balkans historically happened substantially more when the jet stream was in that northern position that creates dry and hot conditions," she said. "And that is exactly what we're seeing this summer. The results that we're seeing in our reconstruction act out in real life." "When you look at how the jet stream's natural variability alone has impacted societies, you can get an idea of what might happen if you add more heat in the atmosphere and more variability," Broadman added. "Being able to say, 'OK, maybe we need to watch out for this or that particular jet stream configuration' can be very helpful for predictions of climate related extremes."

Excess nutrients from industries, agriculture and urban development -- particularly nitrogen and phosphorus -- are well-known causes of harmful algal blooms worldwide. Historically, Lake Okeechobee has only been considered to be impaired for phosphorus, leading to targeted efforts aimed at reducing phosphorus runoff from agricultural sources in the watershed. Now, new research marks a groundbreaking step in understanding and preserving this crucial ecosystem. Researchers from Florida Atlantic University's Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute have conducted the first comprehensive sampling across the Lake Okeechobee Waterway in South Florida, which extends from the St. Lucie Estuary on the east coast to the Caloosahatchee River Estuary on the west coast. To determine what's causing recent cyanobacterial blooms, researchers conducted two research cruises across the Lake Okeechobee Waterway and three sampling events of these blooms. They measured nitrogen isotopes in phytoplankton to see if human waste or fertilizers were involved. Results of the study, published in the journal Harmful Algae , reveal that combatting harmful algal blooms in Lake Okeechobee requires managing both phosphorus and nitrogen, and that human waste played a role in influencing these Microcystis blooms. Findings also underscore the importance of rainfall and extreme rainfall events in driving these big blooms. Inorganic nitrogen levels were elevated in urbanized estuaries and the Kissimmee River, which extends north through the Kissimmee Chain of Lakes to the greater Orlando area, and its water flows into Lake Okeechobee. Furthermore, the expanding urbanization in Orlando was identified as a contributing factor to the increasing prevalence of these blooms in Lake Okeechobee. "Based on our study findings, strategies focused only on reducing phosphorus aren't sufficient," said Brian Lapointe, Ph.D., senior author and a research professor at FAU Harbor Branch. "To tackle toxic cyanobacterial blooms, we need to cut back on both nitrogen and phosphorus. Managing both nutrients is crucial because of their combined impact, which often lead to more severe and persistent harmful algal blooms. In urban areas like the St. Lucie and Caloosahatchee River watersheds, human waste is a major source of these nutrients." Findings show key changes in Lake Okeechobee's algal conditions over the years. Nitrogen-to-phosphorus ratios, microcystins, and Microcystis cell counts in the lake are now higher than in previous decades. Phosphorus levels increased from 50 micrograms per liter in the mid-1970s to more than 100 micrograms per liter by the late 1990s. This rise in phosphorus supported the growth of harmful cyanobacteria like Dolichospermum, which began to outcompete other algae. Sampling occurred from 2018 to 2021 and the cruises took place in 2019 and 2020. This approach provided a detailed, unified snapshot of conditions throughout the entire waterway at a single point in time or over a defined period, rather than isolated or sporadic sampling. After the hurricanes of 2004-05, which led to significant losses in aquatic plants and fish, toxic Microcystis became more dominant in the lake during the warm, wet season from May to October. Similar major blooms occurred during 2013, 2016 and 2018. Because the research cruises took place in 2019 and 2020, which were relatively dry years, researchers did not observe any major Microcystis blooms in the St. Lucie or Caloosahatchee estuaries. "It is during these rainfall events when major nitrogen loading occurs, which we now realize happened in 2013, 2016 and 2018," said Lapointe. "Big blooms appeared in the lake and estuaries following these extreme rain events." Findings also show that the higher nutrients in the urbanized Caloosahatchee River Estuary and St. Lucie Estuary enhanced bloom formations in those locations. The nutrients -- ammonium, nitrate and phosphate -- are highly reactive, which is why the researchers observed thick "scum" on the water's surface in those estuaries. "When water and Microcystis is released from Lake Okeechobee into the estuaries, the growth response is like 'Miracle Grow,'" said Lapointe. "We found the highest concentrations of ammonium, nitrate and phosphate in the estuaries. These nutrients are commonly associated with human waste. Specifically, we observed elevated nitrogen isotope levels, indicating that human waste is a significant source of this nitrogen." Researchers also found significant variation in water conditions across different locations, affecting the spread and intensity of algal blooms. The biggest blooms were observed in the Pahokee Marina and Cape Coral, which were strongly affected by human waste. "Evidence from the Florida Keys shows similar trends of nitrogen enrichment, and our research indicates that such changes may be happening throughout the entire watershed," said Lapointe. Previously, water from the Lake Okeechobee watershed naturally flowed southward through the Everglades. However, changes to the water management system led to the creation of the Lake Okeechobee Waterway, which redirects lake water periodically. It is channeled eastward into the St. Lucie Estuary via the C-44 canal and westward into the Caloosahatchee River and Estuary through the C-43 canal. "Microcystis blooms and their toxicity in Lake Okeechobee and the St. Lucie Estuary are influenced by nitrogen levels, and our study shows that nitrogen enrichment is increasing. It's crucial to reduce nitrogen to control harmful algal blooms along the lake's waterway and in the estuaries downstream," said Rachel Brewton, Ph.D., co-author and an assistant research professor at FAU Harbor Branch. "Given the high nitrogen load from the Upper Kissimmee River, cutting these inputs should be a top priority. Although Lake Okeechobee doesn't have a Total Maximum Daily Load established for nitrogen as it does for phosphorus, the St. Lucie and Caloosahatchee estuaries do, and recent plans for the lake's tributaries aim to address nitrogen reductions." The impact of these blooms varies based on the size of the watersheds and the specific conditions of the receiving waters, such as their hydrology and chemistry. "In the lab, we measured chlorophyll a, microcystins, and amounts of Microcystis and other phytoplankton by analyzing their cell concentrations and pigments in water samples," said Malcolm McFarland, Ph.D., co-author and an associate research professor at FAU Harbor Branch. "We used flow cytometry on water samples on board the research vessels to allow for analysis of live algal cells and avoid losses caused by preservation and storage." Large lakes, rivers, estuaries and coastal areas are increasingly affected by these blooms, raising concerns that the growing frequency of harmful algal blooms and their associated toxins could further threaten drinking water supplies, recreational activities, tourism and fisheries in the future. "These blooms don't only impact Florida's vital water resources but also have national implications for public health, environmental quality and economic well-being," said Lapointe. "Understanding these changes helps us address the challenges of safeguarding our waters and ensures clean, safe water for communities across the country." This research supports the need for improved wastewater treatment and water storage north of Lake Okeechobee including the Lake Okeechobee Watershed Restoration Project and the Lake Okeechobee Component A Reservoir project spearheaded by the South Florida Water Management District. Study co-author is Nicole Stockley, a former research engineer at FAU Harbor Branch. This research was funded by the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Water Resources Program (80NSSC19K1200). Additional support for this research was provided by the Florida Center for Coastal and Human Health, which was developed with a grant from and funded by the Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute Foundation.

Stable groundwater levels are primarily located in temperate regions with year-round high precipitation, such as northern France. "In these regions, high recharge rates keep groundwater levels nearly stable," says Rafael Chávez García Silva, first author and also hydrologist at the UFZ. In other areas, like the lower Po River basin near Ravenna, groundwater levels are even rising due to natural and anthropogenic factors and land subsidence, requiring surface water drainage and groundwater pumping to prevent flooding. In semi-arid regions, however, there are many places, such as Tarbes in France and Medina del Campo in Spain, where groundwater levels have been declining for decades. This is partly due to decreased rainfall and elevated temperatures brought about by climate change. Intensive agriculture is also a significant factor. "These four Mediterranean countries are responsible for a large part of the EU's fruit, vegetable, and grain production, with groundwater supplying 30-50% of irrigation," says Seifeddine Jomaa. Even in temperate regions, the team found wells with declining groundwater levels. The cause is proximity to cities and industry. Since the 1960s, for example, groundwater levels in the metropolitan areas of cities such as Lyon, Nice, Modena, and Bordeaux have been declining. In Bordeaux, the ninth-largest city in France, the high groundwater consumption is attributed to increasing domestic use. The popular French tourist destination, Béziers, has seen a significant decline in groundwater levels due to increased extraction to supply drinking water for summer tourists. While groundwater decline in urban and industrial areas is not easily halted, the researchers found effective management approaches in semi-arid, agricultural regions, which lead to the recovery of groundwater levels, as seen in La Mancha Oriental in Spain. Until the 1990s, groundwater levels were declining due to excessive irrigation. "As a result, sections of the Júcar River dried up in 1994 for the first time ever. This dramatic event prompted farmers to create a water user association that aimed to stop the decline in groundwater levels through a combination of monitoring, remote sensing, and individual water use plans. These measures effectively reversed groundwater level trends in the region," says coauthor J. Jaime Gómez-Hernández, hydrogeologist at the Technical University of Valencia. Against the backdrop of climate change, southwestern Europe can provide lessons for groundwater management in Germany and other regions worldwide, especially as groundwater demand increases and aquifer recharge suffers due to climate change. "Germany could benefit from the experience gained in southwestern Europe, how groundwater can be optimally used, which irrigation methods are more effective, how we enhance stakeholder engagement and what mistakes should be avoided in the future," says Seifeddine Jomaa. One thing is clear: Germany needs an anticipatory approach for sustainable groundwater use.

Published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, the report provides a roadmap for more water capture, storage, and distribution systems that are in harmony with climate projections and ecosystems. It further considers how runoff and groundwater can be used repeatedly as it flows generally from mountainsides to coastal lands. "The availability of water for consumption is decreasing because of climate change, partly due to increased evaporation and transpiration but also because we don't have the system set up to capture and use the larger and more variable flows that are now the norm," said Kurt Schwabe, a public policy professor at UC Riverside and co-author of the report. A warmer planet means fewer but larger rain and snowstorms in California. The rising temperatures and shorter winters also result in smaller volumes of water stored in mountain snowpacks that have historically replenished California's reservoirs each spring. And a greater amount of water is getting lost through evaporation. This means that agriculture, which uses about 80 percent of the water consumed in the state, will need to adjust to a future with less water available for irrigation. To help reduce the overall impact on agriculture and society from climate change, the report's authors envision a more nimble and responsive system that can capture and store water from big storms before it goes to sea to prevent floods and keep crops growing through the hot, dry summer months. To do so, California must increase its water storage capacity, but that doesn't necessarily require building more dams and reservoirs, Schwabe said. Great storage capacity now exists in the state's depleted aquifers below the Central Valley and the coastal plains. "It's really a huge win," Schwabe said. "We can start taking more of those flood flows, and unexpected overflows, and put them in these groundwater aquifers. We've got plenty of capacity there, and you don't suffer from the evaporation rates that you do with the surface reservoirs." Capturing the flows would involve diverting torrents from heavy rains and accelerated snowmelts to farm fields or to habitat lands where controlled flooding would cause no harm, and the water would percolate down to aquifers. Farmers would then have more groundwater to get through drier periods while also reviving wildlife habitats. Farmers also should take advantage of new crop varieties, so they have more flexibility to deal with different water situations. Changing crops, unlike changing irrigation systems, is a practice that can lead to reduced overall water use. "It's obviously an economic decision confronting the growers," Schwabe said. However, switching from a water-intensive practice such as flood irrigation to something like drip irrigation, doesn't necessarily save much water at the system level, he said. Flood irrigation may be appropriate if it helps recharge aquifers, or the runoff is used again by other farms. "Sometimes the runoff water appears later in the system for use," Schwabe said California also needs to build more flexibility into its water delivery systems. The state's three major aqueducts -- the California State Water Project, the Central Valley Project, and the Colorado River Aqueduct -- for the most part transport water from north to south. A greater ability to move water from east to west and vice versa would allow for more efficient water use. Farmers who have more water than they need for a particular season could sell to others in need. With prices based on scarcity plus delivery costs, such a marketplace would have incentives for storage and efficient use, Schwabe said. The report's title is "Cultivating Climate Resilience in California Agriculture: Adaptations to an Increasingly Volatile Water Future." In addition to Schwabe, the report's co-authors are Josué Medellín-Azuar at UC Merced, Alvar Escriva-Bou at UCLA, and Amélie Gaudin and Daniel Sumner at UC Davis. "When I moved to California over 20 years ago, someone told me, "Don't let people tell you there isn't a lot of water in California because there is. The problem is that it's just managed really poorly," Schwabe said. That said, Schwabe believes the state is making progress by developing policies that can lead to more efficient and sustainable outcomes, such as the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act of 2014. "Today more than ever before we're seeing partnerships across environmental, agricultural, and municipal sectors to address water scarcity issues," Schwabe said. "And that's a good thing."

Grassland is one of the most important and most widespread ecosystems on earth. Such open landscapes with grasses and herbs not only cover more than one quarter of the entire land surface but also store at least one third of the terrestrial carbon, are crucial for food production, and can be extremely species-rich in a relatively small area. But what is the future of these habitats? The study provides new insights into this question. It has long been clear that two environmental changes are threatening the world's grasslands. Particularly in Europe, grasslands are now fertilised much more heavily, mowed more frequently, and grazed more intensively. In addition, farmers often sow only a handful of grass varieties that promise a particularly high yield. This intensification of land use is fundamentally changing the species composition and functionality of meadows and pastures. The same applies to climate change. For Germany, climate change will result in a shift in the seasonal distribution of precipitation as well as an increase in hydrological extremes (e.g. heavy rainfall and droughts), among other things. It is considered the second largest threat for these ecosystems. When both changes come together, they can reinforce each other. However, nobody yet knows exactly what will happen. Most experiments on this topic have so far focussed on either the climate or land use. "What makes our study unique is that we investigated the interaction of both factors," explains Dr Lotte Korell, biologist at the UFZ and first author of the publication. This was made possible by the large-scale and long-term experiment of the UFZ in Bad Lauchstädt near Halle, the Global Change Experimental Facility (GCEF). It consists of 50 plots, each measuring 16 × 24 m; these are used with varying degrees of land use intensity. Temperatures and precipitation levels can also be manipulated with the help of mobile roof systems. For example, some plots receive 10% more precipitation in spring and autumn and 20% less in summer than the untreated control plots. This roughly corresponds to the conditions that climate models project for central Germany. An eight-year data series from this experiment has now been compiled for the new study. The researchers analysed the biodiversity and productivity of the plants on the differently used plots between 2015 and 2022. "This period includes three of the driest years this region has experienced since beginning of records," recalls Korell. These droughts apparently had a much stronger effect on the plants than the experimentally simulated climate change. However, in both cases, the trend pointed in the same direction: species-rich grassland that is only rarely mown or sparsely grazed withstood the heat and drought much better than the intensively used high-performance meadows. "Among other factors, this is probably related to the diversity of species," says Korell. This varied greatly depending on the land use of the grasslands. A diverse mixture of more than 50 native grasses and herbs grew on the less intensively used meadows and pastures of the GCEF. However, on the intensively used grassland, the UFZ team had sown only the five grass varieties recommended to farmers by the Saxony-Anhalt State Institute for Agriculture and Horticulture for drier sites at the start of the experiment. These included varieties of meadow grass (Dactylis glomerata) and perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne) . Because such grasses are bred for maximum yield and were also heavily fertilised -- as is common in agricultural practice -- the intensive meadows were initially much more productive than the more diverse grasslands. However, they were able to make use of this advantage only in favourable climatic conditions and were not able to withstand the drought as well as the plants in the low-intensity meadows and pastures. In times of drought, the grasses in the intensively used meadows increasingly died back and were replaced by other species such as chickweed ( Stellaria media ), shepherd's purse ( Capsella bursa-pastoris ), dandelion ( Taraxacum officinale ), and small-flowered cranesbill ( Geranium pusillum ). "These are mostly short-lived species that survive as seeds," explains Dr Harald Auge, also a biologist at the UFZ and senior author of the study. When the more competitive plants succumb to drought, these species take the opportunity to invade their habitats: they either migrate from the low-intensity grassland or germinate from the seed stock in the soil. This shift in species composition is not particularly welcomed by farmers, especially because most of the new arrivals have a lower fodder quality than the grasses originally sown. The common ragwort (Senecio vulgaris) , which was frequently represented among the immigrating species in the experiment, is in fact poisonous. All of this reduces the productivity of the land. Farmers have long been aware of this kind of degradation of high-performance grassland by immigrating species. They therefore expect to have to plough up and reseed their land every few years. "However, climate change may accelerate this need and lead to additional costs," says Korell. Perhaps everything will go well for a few years and it will rain enough. However, it is also possible that several dry summers will follow one another. Climate change is making conditions even more unpredictable. Farmers who have only intensive grassland are therefore less able to plan in such times and thus bear a greater economic risk. On the other hand, low-intensity meadows and pastures not only make an important contribution to preserving biodiversity but also help to stabilise the productivity of grassland in times of climate change.

The new knowledge about zinc can change the way we cultivate crops, as plants can be made more climate-resilient. This means that the plant can acquire increased tolerance to extreme weather, which can not only ensure a more stable crop yield but also reduce the need for artificial fertilizers and enable the cultivation of legumes in new, previously unsuitable areas. "Bacteria can cooperate with legumes to fix nitrogen from the air in root nodules. However, the nodules are sensitive to environmental influences such as temperature, drought, flooding, soil salinity, and high concentrations of nitrogen in the soil," elaborates Assistant Professor and lead author of the study, Jieshun Lin. Researchers from Aarhus University, Denmark, in collaboration with Polytechnic University of Madrid and European Synchrotron Radiation Facility in France, have discovered that legumes use zinc as a secondary signal to integrate environmental factors and regulate nitrogen fixation efficiency. In the study published in Nature, the researchers discovered that FUN is a novel type of zinc sensor, which decodes zinc signals in nodules and regulates nitrogen fixation. "It's truly remarkable to discover zinc's role as a secondary signal in plants. It is a vital micronutrient, and it has never been considered as a signal before. After screening over 150,000 plants, we finally identified the zinc sensor FUN, shedding light on this fascinating aspect of plant biology," Jieshun Lin explains. In this study the researcher identifies that FUN is an important transcription factor that control nodule breakdown when soil nitrogen concentrations are high: "FUN is regulated by a peculiar mechanism that monitor the cellular zinc levels directly and we show that FUN is inactivated by zinc into large filament structures and liberated into the active form when zinc levels are low," Professor Kasper Røjkjær Andersen explains. From an agricultural perspective, continued nitrogen fixation could be a beneficial trait that increases nitrogen availability, both for the legume and for co-cultivated or future crops that rely on the nitrogen left in the soil after legumes are grown. This helps lay the foundations for future research that provides new ways for us to manage our farming systems and reduce the use of nitrogen fertilizer and reduce its impact on the environment. The implications of this research are significant. By understanding how zinc and FUN regulate nitrogen fixation, researchers are developing strategies to optimize this process in legume crops. This could lead to increased nitrogen delivery, improving crop yields and reducing the need for synthetic fertilizers, which have environmental and economic costs. Researchers are now investigating the mechanisms of how zinc signals are generated and decoded by FUN. They are looking forward to applying these new discoveries to legume crops such as faba bean, soybean and cowpea.

Accurate evaporation rate estimates are crucial for water resource managers, as reservoirs play an essential role in our social and economic systems by supplying water for agricultural, municipal, and industrial consumption. Reservoirs are also critical for mitigating impacts from droughts and floods. A recent study published in Water Resources Research highlights the efforts of Texas A&M University researchers Dr. Huilin Gao and Dr. Bingjie Zhao, with coauthors from multiple institutions, state, and federal agencies. The research team developed a more accurate method for estimating daily evaporation rates. "This method will enhance decision-making processes related to reservoir operations, water rights allocation, and long-term water planning in Texas and beyond," said Dr. Nelun Fernando, manager of Texas Water Development Board's (TWDB) water availability department. Zhao, Gao, and their team developed a new computer algorithm to estimate daily reservoir evaporation that accounts for factors not considered by current methods. "If you look at our daily evaporation algorithm, it uses regular meteorological data like wind, temperature, and relative humidity, so it's a lot easier to calculate for each reservoir," said Gao, a professor in the Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering. According to the article, "long-term and consistent reservoir evaporation information is typically reported on a monthly scale. Accurate daily evaporation information is lacking, but it is crucial for hydrological scientific research and regional water resource management." The most common methods for estimating evaporation rely on data from Class A Evaporation Pans. These pans sit outside of the reservoir and estimate evaporation by measuring changes in the pan's water level. The pan evaporation data is then converted to reservoir evaporation data using an adjustment factor known as pan coefficients. Since evaporation pans are typically located away from the reservoir, they do not account for the effects of wind, water depth, or air and water temperature differences across the reservoir. This can lead to inaccurate measurements, creating uncertainty for water resource managers. "The lakes are much deeper than the evaporation pans, causing the water temperatures to be very different," said Zhao. "This means the evaporation rate predicted by the evaporation pan cannot represent the real lake accurately." At this time, the daily evaporation algorithm has only been applied to Texas reservoirs. The results reveal a clear geographic distribution and strong seasonality of evaporation throughout Texas, with highest average losses occurring in July. Additionally, the data reveals a significant upward trend in evaporation rate, with an increase of about 1.1 inch per decade. Gao and Zhao collaborated with Desert Research Institute (DRI) to develop an online portal ( https://dri-apps.earthengine.app/view/twdb-reservoir-evaporation ) that allows stakeholders to visualize and download data in near-real time. Due to the success of the algorithm's estimation on Texas reservoirs, the research team is currently working on evaporation data for all major reservoirs in the western United States. The paper was coauthored by researchers from DRI, TWDB, Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) -- Dallas-Fort Worth District, and U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. This research was supported by USACE, TWDB, LCRA, and NASA.

Disadvantaged communities have been affected more than others in the areas near the Salton Sea, which has been shrinking for years, said the paper's co-leading author Eric Edwards. He is an assistant professor of agricultural economics at University of California, Davis, who did the research while at North Carolina State University. "We have a dusty area, and any time there is wind, it's going to pick up dust and move it around," Edwards said. "We think this new dust is increasing the amount of pollution faced by disadvantaged communities in the region surrounding the lake." An overflowing river The Salton Sea formed in 1905 after the Colorado River overflowed its banks and the floodwaters settled into what was known as the Salton Sink. It was primarily fed by water runoff from agricultural operations for almost a century. As the southern part of California struggled to meet growing water demand, the Imperial Irrigation District agreed to send water to San Diego for urban use. Imperial, which supplies water to vast desert farms as well as seven towns and two special districts, is the largest user of Colorado River water. The agreement with San Diego required agricultural water users to increase efficiency and reduce their water consumption, which reduced water running into the Salton Sea, Edwards said. The reductions increased the lake's salt content, which is higher than in the Pacific Ocean. This also harmed wildlife habitats and created localized air pollution. The area is the subject of many environmental restoration projects. Studying implications Edwards and others used a particle transport model to study the effects of changing water diversions on particulate pollution. They found that the paths of fine particulate matter -- which can cause asthma, heart and respiratory issues when inhaled -- were associated with higher air pollution readings after Imperial began reducing runoff water to the Salton Sea around 2011 in order to transfer it to San Diego, a practice that continues today. Researchers modeled lakebed exposure by dividing the lake's shoreline into 1-square-kilometer grids and collected air pollution data daily for over 20 years, from 1998 to 2018. They added data about the exposed lakebed, or playa, and used a sophisticated physics model called HYSPLIT to factor in wind levels and particle size to track the movement of dust over time. State health screening information available by ZIP code added more to the story by pinpointing disadvantaged areas, asthma rates and other vulnerabilities. Lake levels were higher in 1998 before the transfers, so the change was not evident until later years, when the lakebed became more exposed. "We show that during that post-2011, there is an increase in particles going through disadvantaged communities relative to non-disadvantaged communities, which are farther away from the sea," Edwards said. In the paper, the pollution paths are depicted on a map of the state. The Salton Sea is marked with a black dot, and red lines radiate from there to distances of 100 miles or more. "From every exposed grid cell you have these paths predicting where the particles are going based on physics," Edwards said. "That's the path of emissions." Prior research suggests that dust particles from newly exposed playa are more susceptible to wind erosion. "There's lots of evidence that playa is particularly emissive in terms of dust," Edwards said. "If it's dry, those particles get picked up readily by the wind and create dust -- and at rates higher than areas that have been exposed to the wind over long periods of time." Informing decision makers Edwards said policymakers and regulators should consider the health and environmental impacts of water diversions in their decision making. "The drying up of the Salton Sea has serious health consequences that have generally fallen on more disadvantaged populations, who may not be well equipped to advocate for policies that improve their health," he said. "Policymakers need to think about how to facilitate the movement of water via market transactions, which are essential, while also accounting for potential negative effects on the environment." Ryan Abman from San Diego State University and Dana Hernandez-Cortes from Arizona State University contributed equally with Edwards to the research and journal article. The U.S. Department of Agriculture's National Institute of Food and Agriculture supported this research.

The recent climate crisis has resulted in more frequent extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods. Although models have outlined the anticipated effects of these extreme events on the global water cycle and carbon cycle, efforts to quantitatively comprehend them using observational data have been limited by the limited available big data on water quantity and quality. During spring, the onset of rice planting necessitates ample water in rice paddies and fields in South Korea. Since precipitation is not consistent from year to year and from season to season, over 3,000 agricultural reservoirs across the country have employed for water resource management. Water level data from agricultural reservoirs has been monitored the amount of water available during the crop planting season with additional collection of seasonal water quality data from the reservoirs since 2020. This national-level dataset from the reservoirs offers a unique opportunity to investigate coupled dynamics of the water and carbon cycle. In their study, researchers utilized rotated principal component analysis to extract key major modes of the extensive datasets of water levels and water quality that encompasses information on water volumes and total organic carbon (TOC) concentrations from over 2,200 agricultural reservoirs in Korea spanning from 2020 to 2022. During the study period, reservoir volumes ranged from 289 to 360 metric tons (10 6 t), TOC concentrations varied between 3.54 and 4.60 mg/L, and TOC loads ranged from 1,165 to 1,492 tons. The first major mode of the rotated principal component analysis unveiled a notable trend: as water temperatures rose and reservoir levels dwindled due to drought in the southern region of the Korean Peninsula in 2022, there was a corresponding increase in TOC concentrations. In the second major mode, the researchers observed a significant correlation between fluctuations in reservoir levels in the central area and shifts in TOC concentrations. Moreover, the research found that elevated TOC concentrations were observed in a region where a larger areal fraction of rice paddy fields surrounding agricultural reservoirs. These findings underscore the potential shift of the role of agricultural reservoirs from carbon storage to carbon source that emits carbon into the atmosphere during the period of a severe drought. Professor Jonghun Kam stated, "By leveraging water big data and advanced statistical methodologies, we've quantitatively demonstrated alterations in the water and carbon cycles triggered by extreme drought." He emphasized, "This underscores the pressing need to develop integrative environmental and water policies to prioritize both quantity and quality, especially as we transition into a carbon-neutral era." The research was conducted with the support from the Ocean, Land, and Atmosphere Carbon Cycle System Research Program of the National Research Foundation of Korea.

Imagine eating with your feet and having half your body underground. Such is the life of most plants, with roots as the mouths through which they eat and drink. Roots also serve to anchor plants and keep them safe in wind and rain. Indeed, roots are critical for a plant's life. But many things remain unknown about the life of plants. How they grow their roots big and strong has long been a question and there are key pieces missing to the puzzle. In a new study published recently, researchers from the University of Copenhagen's Department of Biology share their discovery of how plants control root growth. It turns out that a beneficial clean-up mechanism in plant cells called autophagy plays a key role. The same mechanism exists in humans and is part of a popular health trend. "Fasting has become popular as it seems to have a range of health-promoting effects in humans, as periods without food cause the body to activate a clean-up processes to dispose of various waste products in cells. In our study, we have proven that the same mechanism, which also exists in the plant kingdom, plays a vital role in the ability of plant roots to grow and absorb water and nutrients for the rest of the plant," explains Assistant Professor Eleazar Rodriguez from the Department of Biology, who led the study. Roots have a heartbeat It has long been known that auxin, a plant hormone, controls plant growth, root growth included. Auxin is a fuel for a kind of heartbeat that beats in each and every root tip of a plant. Roughly every four to six hours, auxin levels and the heartbeat in a plant's roots reach a maximum that causes new roots to grow. "The movement of a root is almost like watching a snake slithering forward in search of water and nourishment in the soil. And we can see that the heartbeat is strongest every time the root meanders forth," says Eleazar Rodriguez. But how plants control its heartbeat so as to optimize root growth, has remained an unanswered question. This is where the plant's internal clean-up mechanism comes into the picture. "In our experiments, we disabled the clean-up mechanism to understand its significance. Imagine if every garbage collector in Copenhagen went on strike -- it wouldn't be long before trash filled the streets. The same thing happened in the plant cells, as the heartbeats that drive root growth became much weaker and went out of sync," explains Eleazar Rodriguez. Doing this allowed the researchers to conclude that the clean-up mechanism helps keep levels of different biochemical components in perfect balance to provide the most efficient root growth. Can help germinate new climate-resilient crops According to the researchers, the new knowledge about plant roots may prove important in the fight against climate change. Extended periods of drought and floods are a new normal that place greater demands on food security. As such, the roots of the crops, which must be able to grow even in these harsh conditions. "Numerous methods to change the genetic characteristics of plants are available today. These can be used to get plants to develop longer roots, faster, and in doing so, become more resistant to droughts or floods. One of the methods enlists the help of bacteria that live in symbiosis with the plant and can cause the plant to change its growth pattern. Several companies in Denmark are working on this right now," explains Ph.D. student Jeppe Ansbøl who co-authored the study.. The new knowledge applies to all flowering plants and perhaps more, according to the researcher. In principle, crops like tomatoes, potatoes, rice, wheat and corn could be altered to grow more and denser roots, because we now know how plants get their roots to grow. "The more roots the plants have the more water and nutrients they can take, so the plants grow better faster. We're heavily dependent on plants because they feed us, extract CO 2 from the atmosphere and produce the oxygen we breathe. As such, it is extremely important to understand them fully, to which end we have just taken a big step forward," concludes Eleazar Rodriguez. More about the result: Causing the garbage collectors in cells to go on strike Autophagy means 'self-eating' and is a key mechanism when plants develop roots. To investigate the significance of autophagy, the researchers developed a mutant Arabidopsis (thale cress) plant in which its autophagy was disabled. At the same time, they made the ARF7 protein luminescent, which is the protein that controls the auxin responses and which the plant cell's garbage collectors clean up to provide optimal root growth. The plant's garbage collectors collect waste from cells and transport it to a kind of recycling station in the plant called a vacuole. "When we disrupted the plant's autophagy, there was waste everywhere, and we were able to detect the ARF7 protein among the waste," says Eleazar Rodriguez.

Research into US wheat commodities by economists at Southampton, in collaboration with UCL, also suggests high uncertainty about the state of future harvests hasn't destabilised the market. Findings are published in the Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control . Wheat is an important crop in the United States used for food production. A small fraction becomes animal feed and the crop isn't used to generate biofuel. The main buyers of wheat are flour mills, food processors, and direct consumers. The researchers analysed data on American wheat production, inventories, crop area, prices and wider market conditions from 1950 to 2018, together with records of annual fluctuations in the weather for the same period. This showed strong evidence of an increase in weather and harvest variability from 1974 onwards. "Before the mid-70s, oil was the dominant driver of wheat price fluctuations in the US, but after this point we see a much stronger influence coming from a wider set of factors that includes weather and food consumption," explains lead author Dr Vincenzo De Lipsis of the University of Southampton. "Extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods, are becoming more frequent and intense across the world due to climate change. Understanding the impact of this variability on food commodity prices is crucial, as it could have serious implications for food security." The authors found that in the US the market system around wheat has remained competitive, functioning well and adapting to the new uncertain climate conditions. The potential for weather fluctuations to adversely affect wheat prices has increased, but in reality this hasn't been passed on to the market. Wheat prices remain relatively stable, along with the price of associated goods. The researchers found that this is mainly due to farmers and agricultural industries providing a buffer, smoothing out any bumps in the supply of grain to retailers and consumers, thus reducing shocks to the market that poor harvests may cause. This has been achieved by investment in substantial storage facilities, modern infrastructure and good transport links. According to the study, the US wheat sector has demonstrated remarkable resilience and flexibility in adapting to the ever-increasing unpredictability of the climate and harvest by modifying its inventory management. At the same time, there is no indication that the wheat market is vulnerable to excessive volatility from the related financial futures market, which can often emerge in commodity markets in response to increased uncertainty regarding future production capacity. Commenting on what policymakers can take from the research, Dr De Lipsis says: "We have shown that market forces provide a powerful stabilising mechanism to counter the increased variability in weather and harvest observed in the last half a century. "The market mechanism is one of the most effective instruments that governments have available for climate change adaptation and food security. But for this to work effectively, we need a combination of factors in place: a well-functioning competitive commodity market, a modern infrastructure with extensive transport networks, sufficient food storage capacity and a liquid futures market. "However, while the system in the US continues to be robust, it's hard to predict if storage mechanisms will work equally well if faced with unprecedented levels of weather variability -- the kind of extreme events that can potentially disrupt the transport network and the very infrastructure on which it is based." The authors acknowledge that stability is easier to achieve in developed and more affluent countries, but say that their results underscore the need to prioritise investment in these key areas in developing regions to ensure a reliable and secure food supply in the future.

Not all city blocks are created equal. In Physics of Fluids , an AIP Publishing journal, researchers from Beijing Normal University, Beijing Hydrological Center, and the China Institute of Water Resources and Hydropower Research investigated how city design contributes to pedestrian safety during flooding. "Climate change leads to an increasing trend of extreme precipitation events in terms of frequency and intensity," said author Zhong-Fan Zhu. "Rapid urbanization alters the hydrological properties of the underlying surface in urban areas. For example, previous forestland, wetland, and agricultural land have been paved to construct impervious, urban lands. These factors contribute to frequency occurrences of urban flood events." The researchers experimentally identified the flood conditions that make pedestrians vulnerable and utilized computer simulations of different city block patterns, building heights, and street widths to assess the configurations that best protect people. Each city has unique buildings and building configurations. The team simulated three different urban block layouts: buildings neatly arranged and equally spaced in columns and rows, buildings offset and staggered, and a square tightly outlined by buildings with just four buildings enclosed within. When buildings are arranged in a line, as in the grid and enclosed layout, they provide a zone of safety by blocking some of the water and wind. The staggered approach has none of this protection and more danger zones due to increased water and wind circulation. Altering the building shape can also protect pedestrians. Rounding or adding recesses to building corners significantly reduced areas of dangerously high floodwater and windspeed. However, this intervention also somewhat decreased the safety zone. Wind was a critical, yet complex, factor in determining safety. "In some cases, the floodwater does not cause pedestrian instability, but adding the wind force will lead to a dangerous situation," said Zhu. "However, in other cases, the wind will help to maintain pedestrian stability and protect against floodwater. It seems like that wind is like a 'double-edged sword.'" Different building height arrangements can help mitigate the negative impacts of wind. Cities looking to expand should consider enclosed block arrangements, buildings with rounded or even circular footprints, and potentially consult with a physicist.

The study, published today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , uses climate and agricultural data from Brazil. It finds that climate change has a cascading effect on farming, leading to increased loan defaults for one of the nation's largest public sector banks. Over the next three decades, climate-driven loan defaults could increase by up to 7%, according to the study. The projections in the paper revealed that although temperatures are rising everywhere, there is substantial variation in what that looks like from region to region, which underscores the need to build distinct types of physical and financial resilience. For example, parts of northern Brazil are predicted to have more dramatic seasonal swings around 2050, with heavier rainfall in winter and drier summers, so policymakers should be thinking about the need for water storage by building dams and reservoirs as well as increasing groundwater storage capacity. Conversely, central Brazil may have fairly steady weather, but will have higher overall temperatures, pointing to a need for heat-resistant crops. The authors of the paper used a statistical approach pairing past climate data in Brazil with information on crop productivity, farm revenue and agricultural loan performance. They combined this data with climate simulations to predict future weather conditions and their impacts on farming and how those changes will affect financial institutions. "A difficulty in studying climate impacts on agriculture is that there are all sorts of adaptations happening all the time that aren't easily observed, but are really important for understanding vulnerability and how risk is changing," said coauthor Jennifer Burney, professor of environmental science at UC San Diego's School of Global Policy and Strategy and Scripps Institution of Oceanography. "We were able to distinguish signals from different types of climate impacts and which ones led to this larger financial risk." Systematic thinking about building resilience against climate change around the globe A key objective of the research is to support resilient food security under a changing climate, which requires understanding of when small climate shifts might have outsized impacts, spilling across regions or into other sectors through institutions like trade and banking. Understanding the systemic risk posed by climate change is especially helpful for policymakers and disaster relief agencies, as climate change has increasingly become a national security threat. To that end, the statistical approach developed in the study could be applied around the globe. "The technique we developed will help populations identify where they are most vulnerable, how climate change will hurt them the most economically and what institutions they should focus on to build resilience," said study coauthor Craig McIntosh, professor of economics at the School of Global Policy and Strategy. For example, some governments in the Western Pacific region buy extra food on the global market in emerging El Niño years, when their own crop productivity suffers. The statistical approach used in the study could help governments around the world understand their own climate conditions and whether local, regional or international institutions will be best placed to address them. The research could be especially helpful with the development of the loss and damage fund established by the United Nations in 2022. The fund is designed to help compensate developing nations that have contributed the least to the climate crisis but have been facing the brunt of its devastating floods, drought and sea-level rise. "Our technique could help countries think about where the resilience returns would be highest for the money spent," said Krislert Samphantharak, professor of economics at the School of Global Policy and Strategy. "This technique also helps to identify where international reinsurance might be needed." The "Empirical Modeling of Agricultural Climate Risk" study was also coauthored by Bruno Lopez-Videla, who earned a Ph.D. in economics from UC San Diego in 2021 and Alexandre Gori Maia of the Universidade Estadual de Campinas in Brazil.

"These sensors, adapted for highly dynamic flow like floods, allow us to see if a disproportionate amount of CO 2 is transferred from land during short periods of time, and whether this can contribute significant emissions to the atmosphere," said Wilfred Wollheim, associate professor of natural resources and environment. The study published in Limnology and Oceanography: Methods outlines how the researchers modified an existing sensor -- originally developed to measure dissolved carbon dioxide in oceans -- by adding a protective housing that accounted for changing water levels and unidirectional flow of running water. The researchers also chose materials known to limit damage to the sensor by microorganisms. The team plans to make these sensor modifications publicly available, allowing other scientists to use the design. "After making these adaptations, we found the sensors to be quite reliable in measuring carbon dioxide in streams," said graduate student Drew Robison '21 and lead author. "We were able to differentiate between streams that were bigger sources of CO 2 and start to examine when and why moments of high CO 2 emissions occurred." In addition to being able to accurately measure CO 2 levels in streams and rivers, the researchers wanted to significantly increase the frequency at which emissions could be captured, helping to better understand the impacts of extreme precipitation events and other periods when there could be disruptions to normal observed water flow rates. The researchers say this information could be particularly important in determining how land use choices may alter the CO 2 regimes of streams and rivers. For example, if a forest is developed into a farm, or a suburban neighborhood, the sensors could help understand the mechanism of any change, such as altering stream metabolism or the runoff dynamics. Wollheim has begun related sensor modification projects to measure carbon and nitrogen in other environments, including forests and agricultural lands. These sensors will focus on soil characteristics, potentially providing farmers and other land managers with almost real-time information for optimizing soil nutrients to support their farming operations and minimizing excess fertilizer applications that could lead to runoff and surplus nutrients in nearby lakes, ponds and other bodies of water. This work was supported by the N.H. Agricultural Experiment Station through joint funding provided by the National Institute of Food and Agriculture and the state of New Hampshire, as well as funding from the National Science Foundation's Long Term Ecological Research program.

New research led by a team at the University of California, Berkeley, used machine learning to more accurately predict which waterways are protected by the Act. The analysis found that a 2020 Trump administration rule removed Clean Water Act protection for one-fourth of US wetlands and one-fifth of US streams, and also deregulated 30% of watersheds that supply drinking water to household taps. "Using machine learning to understand these rules helps decode the DNA of environmental policy," said author Joseph Shapiro, an associate professor of Agricultural and Resource Economics at UC Berkeley. "We can finally understand what the Clean Water Act actually protects." Prior analyses assumed that streams and wetlands sharing certain geophysical characteristics were regulated, without scrutinizing data on what was actually regulated -- an approach the Environmental Protection Agency and Army Corps of Engineers called, "highly unreliable." The researchers trained a machine learning model to predict 150,000 jurisdictional decisions by the Army Corps. Each Corps decision interprets the Clean Water Act for one site and rule. The model predicts regulation across the U.S. under the Trump rule and its predecessor, the Supreme Court's Rapanos ruling, which had previously guided Corps decisions. The research found that the 2020 rule deregulated 690,000 stream miles, more than every stream in California, Florida, Illinois, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Texas combined. The wetlands deregulated under the 2020 rule provided over $250 billion in flood prevention benefits to nearby buildings, the study estimated. "This game of regulatory ping-pong has staggering effects on environmental protection," said author Simon Greenhill, a Ph.D. candidate at UC Berkeley. The study estimates that the model's predictions could save over $1 billion annually in permitting costs for regulators and developers by providing immediate estimates of the probability that a site is regulated, rather than waiting months through the uncertain permitting process. After this study's data, the 2023 Biden White House rule expanded Clean Water Act jurisdiction and the Supreme Court's 2023 Sackett decision then contracted it. Once Sackett is fully implemented, this machine learning methodology can clarify its scope.

At the beginning of November, The New York Times ran the headline, "America is using up its groundwater like there's no tomorrow." The journalists from the renowned media outlet had published an investigation into the state of groundwater reserves in the United States. They came to the conclusion that the United States is pumping out too much groundwater. But the US isn't an isolated case. "The rest of the world is also squandering groundwater like there's no tomorrow," says Hansjörg Seybold, Senior Scientist in the Department of Environmental Systems Science at ETH Zurich. He is coauthor of a study that has just been published in the journal Nature . Scientific evidence of rapidly depleting water resources Together with researchers from the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), he has corroborated the journalists' worrying findings. It is not only in North America that far too much groundwater is being pumped out, but also in other parts of the world where humans have settled. In an unprecedented feat of painstaking effort, the researchers have compiled and analysed data from over 170,000 groundwater monitoring wells and 1,700 groundwater systems over the past 40 years. This measurement data shows that in recent decades, humans have massively expanded groundwater extraction worldwide. The water level in most groundwater-bearing rock layers, known as aquifers, has fallen drastically almost everywhere in the world since 1980. And since 2000, this decline in groundwater reserves has accelerated. The effects are most pronounced in aquifers in the world's arid regions, including California and the High Plains in the US, along with Spain, Iran, and Australia. "We weren't surprised that groundwater levels have fallen sharply worldwide, but we were shocked at how the pace has picked up in the past two decades," Seybold says. One of the reasons Seybold cites for the accelerated drop in groundwater levels in arid regions is that people use these areas intensively for agriculture and are pumping (too) much of the groundwater to the surface to irrigate crops, for example in California's Central Valley. Food cultivation and climate change exacerbate the problem Moreover, the world's population is growing, which means more food needs to be produced, for example in the arid regions of Iran. This is one of the countries where groundwater reserves have fallen the most. But climate change is also exacerbating the groundwater crisis: some areas have become drier and hotter in recent decades, meaning agricultural crops need to be irrigated more heavily. Where climate change is driving a decline in precipitation, groundwater resources recover more slowly, if at all. Heavy rainfall, which is occurring more frequently in some places as a result of climate change, is also not of any help. If the water comes in huge quantities, the soil often cannot absorb it. Instead, the water drains off at the surface without seeping into the groundwater. This problem is particularly acute in places with a high level of soil sealing, such as large cities. Trend can be reversed "The study also reveals good news," says co-author Debra Perrone. "Aquifers in some areas have recovered in places where there have been policy changes or where alternative sources of water are available for direct use or for recharging the aquifer." One of the positive examples is the Genevese aquifer, which supplies drinking water to around 700,000 people in the canton of Geneva and the neighbouring French department of Haute-Savoie. Between 1960 and 1970, its level fell drastically because both Switzerland and France were pumping out water in an uncoordinated manner. Some wells even dried up and had to be closed. To preserve the shared water resource, politicians and authorities in both countries agreed to replenish the aquifer artificially with water from the Arve River. The intention was first to stabilise the groundwater level and later to raise it -- and the intervention was a success. "While the water level in this aquifer may not have returned to its original level, the example shows that groundwater levels don't always have to go only one way: down," Seybold says. Other countries are reacting, too The authorities have also had to take action in other countries: In Spain, a large pipeline has been built to carry water from the Pyrenees to central Spain, where it feeds the Los Arenales aquifer. In Arizona, water is diverted from the Colorado River into other bodies of water to replenish the groundwater reservoirs -- although this does cause the delta of the Colorado River to dry up at times. "Such examples are a ray of hope," says UCSB researcher and lead author Scott Jasechko. Nevertheless, he and his colleagues are urgently calling for more measures to combat the depletion of groundwater supplies. "Once heavily depleted, aquifers in semi-deserts and deserts may require hundreds of years to recover because there's simply not enough rainfall to swiftly replenish these aquifers," Jasechko says. There is an additional danger on the coasts: if the groundwater level falls below a certain level, seawater can invade the aquifer. This salinises the wells, leaving the water that is pumped up unusable neither for drinking water nor for irrigating fields; trees whose roots reach into the flow of groundwater die. On the east coast of the US, there are already extensive ghost forests with not a single living tree. "That's why we can't put the problem on the back burner," Seybold says. "The world must take urgent action."

"We look at more than a decade of precipitation events in the state of Wisconsin and quantify the increase in nutrient runoff right around the event and at the end of the growing season. Climate models predict that we'll continue to see an increase in extreme events, and our works speaks to the challenging relationship between nutrient use and water quality," said Marin Skidmore, assistant professor in the Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics, part of the College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences (ACES) at U. of I. Skidmore is lead author of the study with coauthors Jeremy Foltz from University of Wisconsin-Madison and Tihitina Andarge from the University of Massachusetts-Amherst. "Our focus on a single state allows us to accurately measure farm locations and practices, while keeping statewide regulation constant, in a way that would be difficult in a national study," Skidmore added. Livestock manure and crop fertilizer are major causes of nonpoint source pollution from agriculture. Wisconsin has a large dairy industry, where most farms are below the federal definition of concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) and therefore not regulated under the Clean Water Act. Instead, they are subject to a patchwork of local regulations. The researchers studied water quality across nearly 50 watersheds in Wisconsin from 2008 to 2020. They correlated ammonia and phosphorus concentration data from the Water Quality Portal with the location of livestock farms and crop acreages, and they determined nutrient levels after ½ inch, 1 inch, and 2 inches of rainfall. They found spikes in nutrient concentrations immediately after extreme precipitation events, and the effect increased with the amount of precipitation. For example, within five days of an inch of precipitation, ammonia was 49% higher and phosphorus was 24% higher. If there was at least one day in a month with over an inch of precipitation, monthly ammonia was 28% higher and monthly phosphorus was 15% higher. "We observe a significant interaction between rainfall, agricultural production, and runoff. It is not just a short-term spike in nutrient levels; at the end of the season, we still see persistent increases in phosphorus and ammonia attributed to those extreme precipitation events months earlier," Skidmore stated. However, the researchers found that agricultural management practices can help mitigate the effects. "Our results show that cover crops planted in the winter can lower the amount of nutrients in the water. Areas with cover crops have significantly lower spikes in ammonia and phosphorus, and the effect persists until the end of the growing season. We already know cover crops are great for soils and nutrient management, but this is additional empirical evidence showing that cover crops are climate-smart practices that can help agriculture be resilient into the future," Skidmore said. The researchers also observed the presence of legacy nutrients, which are left behind from agricultural practices decades or even centuries ago. "There is a direct impact of extreme precipitation on runoff that is unexplained by current activities. We attribute this to sedimented nutrients that remain in the soil from previous activities," Skidmore noted. "One of the best ways to deal with legacy nutrients is to ensure soils are healthy. By preventing soil erosion, you keep the legacy nutrients in the soil and out of surface water. These findings further support the use of management practices such as conservation tillage, vegetative buffer strips, and cover crops." Wisconsin watersheds feed into North America's two largest river systems, the Mississippi and Great Lakes/St. Lawrence. Nutrient pollution can have acute local impacts, such as green algal blooms, which can be toxic to humans and animals. If people can't enjoy recreational activities like swimming or fishing, it leads to losses for local economies. Furthermore, downstream impacts continue along the Mississippi River into the Gulf of Mexico where nutrients contribute to a growing dead zone. Finding solutions to dealing with nutrient pollution benefits the environment and society in general, Skidmore noted. "Conservation strategies are not necessarily cost-effective for producers, so we must ensure there are policies in place to support their implementation. As we're approaching the next Farm Bill, there are discussions around how to allocate funds from the Inflation Reduction Act for climate-smart and conservation ag practices. It's important that such practices continue to receive funding so farmers can facilitate those benefits for all of us," she concluded.

The paper was published Dec. 5 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences and supported by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The findings begin to unspool the long term public health impacts of recurring environmental hazards such as flooding, wildfires, or extreme heat, many of which are becoming more common or more severe under climate change, said study co-author Tarik Benmarhnia, an associate professor at Scripps Oceanography who studies climate change and health. Benmarhnia and his co-authors were motivated to undertake the study as a way to move beyond cataloging the acute public health impacts of natural hazards linked to climate change. "We wanted to document what happens when year after year some communities are exposed to these climate hazards," said Benmarhnia. Benmarhnia and his co-authors wanted to find a way to look at the long term public health burden of living in flood prone-areas on child mortality and Bangladesh seemed to offer an opportunity to quantify that burden over a long time period. "Child mortality is a proxy for easily avoidable negative health outcomes," said Benmarhnia. "If we can't avoid child mortality there are also likely to be issues with malnutrition, mental health, and communicable diseases -- from a public health perspective infant mortality is only the tip of the iceberg." Bangladesh sits in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna river basin, which also runs through Tibet, Nepal, Bhutan, and northern India and is home to more than 618 million people. Every year, monsoon season brings extensive flooding to Bangladesh, and those floods are predicted to become more frequent and extreme due to climate change. To look at the long term health implications of repeated exposure to flooding, the study combined a well-established spatially-resolved flood-zone mapping tool and health data from 58,945 mothers and 150,081 births collected by U.S. AID's Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) program between 1988 and 2017. The study matched mothers that were nearly identical across other measurable characteristics that might impact infant mortality, such as wealth and education, and differed only in the flood-risk of their birthing location. "We wanted to isolate as much as possible the effect of living in flood-prone areas from other factors that could alter the risk of child mortality," said Benmarhnia. The study estimated that living in flood prone areas was associated with an excess risk in infant mortality of 5.3 additional deaths per 1,000 births compared to living in non-flood prone areas over the 30-year period between 1988 and 2017, with children born during rainy months at higher risk of death than those born in dry months. The researchers then used national population data, weighted statistical analysis, and the same flood-zone mapping tools to extrapolate their findings with this initial group to the entire country of Bangladesh. This national-scale analysis estimated that 152,753 excess infant deaths were attributable to living in flood-prone areas in Bangladesh over the past 30 years. The study's results don't point to any particular mechanism for how flood exposure might drive increased infant mortality, and Benmarhnia said investigating potential causes will be a necessary step in developing effective interventions. That said, he suggested that flooding can impact food security and financial stability, especially for agricultural communities. Benmarhnia said the findings suggest that focusing only on the immediate effects of flooding may underestimate their impact on population health, and that effects on infant mortality in particular appear to manifest over a longer time scale. The study also provides a template for measuring longer-term health impacts from floods and a generalizable example of how to study the long-term health effects of climate-related environmental hazards. The role of climate change was not explicitly included in the analysis, said Benmarhnia, but he said there was a continuous increase in the overall risk of infant mortality across the study's three decades. "We didn't quantify the role of climate change, but it's the elephant in the room," said Benmarhnia. "While our data can't explicitly link our findings to climate change, they're compatible with the notion that climate change is making flooding and the public health impacts that flow from it worse." In light of their findings, the study authors are now studying the potential of seasonally-timed nutritional interventions that can bolster food security when communities are at the greatest risk from flooding and other climate-sensitive exposures. "We need to be thinking about and dealing with the long term consequences of other climate hazards and instances of so-called extreme weather," said Benmarhnia. "We may also need to redefine our concept of extreme. The intensity is extreme but these environmental hazards like flooding are less and less rare. We may need to reframe these issues as recurring problems, and not just emergency situations." In addition to Benmarhnia, the study was co-authored by Francois Rerolle, who is a postdoctoral researcher at UC San Francisco and Scripps Oceanography, and Benjamin Arnold of UC San Francisco.

Scientists from the University of Cambridge studied hundreds of tree trunks, dug up by Fenland farmers while ploughing their fields. The team found that most of the ancient wood came from yew trees that populated the area between four and five thousand years ago. These trees, which are a nuisance when they jam farming equipment during ploughing, contain a treasure trove of perfectly preserved information about what the Fens looked like thousands of years ago. The Fen yew woodlands suddenly died about 4,200 years ago, when the trees fell into peat and were preserved until today. The researchers hypothesise that a rapid sea level rise in the North Sea flooded the area with salt water, causing the vast woodlands to disappear. The climate and environmental information these trees contain could be a valuable clue in determining whether this climate event could be related to other events that happened elsewhere in the world at the same time, including a megadrought in the Middle East that may have been a factor in the collapse of ancient Egypt's Old Kingdom. Their results are reported in the journal Quaternary Science Reviews . Yew ( Taxus baccata ) trees are one of the longest-lived species in Europe, and can reach up to 20 metres in height. While these trees are fairly common in Cambridge College gardens and churchyards across southern England, they are absent in the Fens, the low-lying marshy region of eastern England. Much of the Fens was a wetland until it was drained between the 17 th and 19 th centuries using artificial drainage and flood protection. Today, the area is some of the most productive farmland in the UK, thanks to its rich peat soil. While the area is great for farming and does have its own charms, few people would describe the Fens as spectacular: for the most part, the area is extremely flat and dominated by fields of potatoes, sugar beet, wheat and other crops. But five thousand years ago, the area was a huge forest. "A common annoyance for Fenland farmers is getting their equipment caught on big pieces of wood buried in the soil, which can often happen when planting potatoes, since they are planted a little deeper than other crops," said lead author Tatiana Bebchuk, a PhD student from Cambridge's Department of Geography. "This wood is often pulled up and piled at the edge of fields: it's a pretty common sight to see these huge piles of logs when driving through the area." For farmers, these logs are a nuisance. But for Bebchuk and her colleagues, they are buried treasure. The Cambridge team approached several Fenland farmers and took samples of hundreds of logs that had been dug up and discarded, to find out what secrets they might hold. "I remember when I first saw this enormous pile of abandoned trees, it was incredible just how many there were," said Bebchuk. "But when we got them back to lab, we were even more surprised: these trees were so well-preserved, it looked as if they were cut down just yesterday." To put current anthropogenic climate change in a long-term context of natural variability, scientists need accurate evidence from the past, and trees are some of the best recorders of past conditions: their annual growth rings contain information about temperature and hydroclimate for every growing season they witnessed. "But the further back in time we go, the less reliable evidence we have, since very old trees and well-preserved wood materials are extremely rare," said Professor Ulf Büntgen, the senior author of the study. However, analysis by the Cambridge Tree-Ring Unit (TRU) showed that the yew trees dug up from Fenland fields were very old indeed: some of these ancient trees were 400 years old when they died. The new find provides unique climate information for over a millennium from around 5,200 years ago until about 4,200 years ago, when much of the Fens was a woodland of yew and oak: completely different than it looks today. "Finding these very old trees in the Fens is completely unexpected -- it would be like turning a corner in rural Cambridgeshire and seeing an Egyptian pyramid -- you just wouldn't expect it," said Bebchuk. "It's the same with nature -- wood rots and decomposes easily, so you just don't expect a tree that died five or four thousand years ago to last so long." Given that most of the Fens are barely above sea level, about 4,200 years ago, a sudden rise in sea level most likely killed the Fen woodlands. The period that the Fen woodlands died coincided with major climatic changes elsewhere in the world: at roughly the same time, a megadrought in China and the Middle East was a possible trigger of the collapse of several civilisations, including Egypt's Old Kingdom and the Akkadian Empire in Mesopotamia. "We want to know if there is any link between these climatic events," said Bebchuk. "Are the megadroughts in Asia and the Middle East possibly related to the rapid sea level rise in northern Europe? Was this a global climate event, or was it a series of unrelated regional changes? We don't yet know what could have caused these climate events, but these trees could be an important part of solving this detective story." "This is such a unique climate and environmental archive that will provide lots of opportunities for future studies, and it's right from Cambridge's own backyard," said Büntgen. "We often travel all over the world to collect ice cores or ancient trees, but it's really special to find such a unique archive so close to the office."

"We can clearly show that many risks are not linked to climate. While climate change is a global problem, other important risk factors like land subsidence, population density and ineffective governance are local problems. Risks to deltas will only increase over time, so now is the time for governments to take action," says Murray Scown, associate senior lecturer, Lund University Centre for Sustainability Studies, and lead author. Collapse of delta environments could have huge consequences for global sustainable development. In the worst-case scenario, deltas could be lost to the sea; other consequences are flooding, salinization of water, which affects agriculture, coastal squeeze, and loss of ecosystems. The study, published in Global Environmental Change, looked at five different IPCC scenarios for global development in 49 deltas all over the world, including famous deltas such as the Nile, Mekong, and Mississippi, but also more understudied deltas such as the Volta, Zambezi and Irrawaddy deltas. The research identifies possible risks to deltas stretching 80 years into the future. The researchers based their analysis on 13 well-known factors affecting risk in deltas and drew upon unique models to identify which of these risks are most likely to endanger different deltas in the future. Risk factors include increasing population density, urban development, irrigated agriculture, changes to river discharge, land subsidence and relative sea-level rise, limited economic capacity, poor government effectiveness, and low adaptation readiness. Population density, land subsidence and ineffective governance are high risk factors The analysis shows that there are some risks that are more critical to deltas than others -- in all of the five future scenarios. These include land subsidence and relative sea-level rise, population density, ineffective governance, economic capacity, and crop land use. For some deltas, physical risks are especially pronounced. Land subsidence is, for example, the highest risk factor for the Mekong delta in Vietnam. Extreme sea levels are among the most concerning risk factors for deltas in China, on the Korean peninsula, and in the Colorado (Mexico) and Rhine (Netherlands) deltas. In the Nile (Egypt), Niger (Nigeria), and the Ganges (Bangladesh) deltas, it is increasing population density that is of most concern under certain scenarios. For other deltas, it is the lack of economic capacity and government effectiveness to manage risks, for example in the Irrawaddy (Myanmar) and Congo (Angola and Democratic Republic of the Congo) deltas. "Analysed all together, we can see that the Asian mega-deltas are at greatest risk, with potentially devastating consequences for millions of people, and for the environment. They are under pressure from population growth, intense agricultural land use, relative sea-level rise, and lagging adaptation readiness," says Murray Scown. Local and global approaches and a mixture of hard and soft adaptation can mitigate risks "Instead of sitting back, governments need to think long-term, and put plans in place to reduce or mitigate risks. In the Mekong delta, for example, the Vietnamese government are making strong efforts to restrict future groundwater extraction in the delta to reduce land subsidence and salinization," says Philip Minderhoud, assistant professor at Wageningen University and Research. The researchers highlight that a mixture of hard ("grey") and soft ("green") adaptation approaches will be required to manage and mitigate delta risks. They include both hard infrastructures, like sea walls to stop the sea inundating the delta, and soft approaches using nature-based solutions. One example is the Dutch experience of creating room for the river in the Rhine delta, by lowering floodplains, relocating levees, and using spaces that are allowed to flood for grazing. Initiatives to build up delta surfaces by allowing rivers to flood and deposit sediment on the delta to maintain elevation above sea level are also promising, notes Frances Dunn, assistant professor at Utrecht University. "By looking at the deltas together, like we have in this study, we want to highlight what can happen on a global scale if we do not address delta risk both on a local and global level. The study can also complement studies on individual deltas, and identify efforts needed connected to less studied deltas such as the Saõ Francisco or Volta delta," says Maria Santos, professor at the University of Zurich.

"The evidence suggests that individuals and households are the primary adaptation actors -- the ones actually implementing ways to adapt to the changes wrought by climate change," said study co-author Christine Kirchhoff, associate professor of civil and environmental engineering and of law, policy and engineering at Penn State. "Geographically, in higher income countries, the government may begin to take the lead in planning or financing, but individuals are the ones taking action on the ground." Adaptations taken by individuals include planting crops more resilient to extreme weather, moving away from areas more directly impacted by storms and flooding, and implementing behavioral changes -- such as changing their outdoor working hours to cooler parts of the day, among other actions. "Individuals are primarily focused on changing what they can control: their own behaviors," said Elphin Tom Joe, paper co-author and doctoral student at Penn State who works with Kirchhoff. "That's needed, but so is action from institutional actors who can coordinate more broadly impactful adaptation." The study, led by Jan Petzold of Ludwig-Maximillians-University of Munich, is a deeper dive into findings from the Global Adaption Mapping Initiative (GAMI), which was developed to systematically assess the peer-reviewed scientific literature as the evidence base on adaptation progress. "From the GAMI project, we found that the larger effort global adaptation is still nascent and certainly not transformative in changing hearts and minds in broadscale adaptation initiatives," said Kirchhoff, who is also associate director of the Law, Policy and Engineering initiative at Penn State. The researchers examined 1,472 scientific studies on human adaption to climate change from the GAMI database and coded them by types of actors leading the adaptation measures: individuals or households; civil society, from local to international; government, from local to national; international or multinational governance institutions; and private sectors. On average, across the globe, individuals and households were doing the most to adapt, followed by governments. The divide between adaptation actions taken by individuals versus governments is biggest in rural areas but in high-resource urban areas the situation is reversed. Importantly, the researchers said, even in areas where governments are doing more, they remained largely focused on adaptation planning and finance while individuals led implementation. The researchers found that adaptation implementation by individuals -- who were by far taking the most documented adaptation actions -- was incremental, more shallow and less connected to institutional change. While government actors were generally less prominent, especially when it came to implementing adaptations. Elphin pointed to climate resilient seeds as an example of incremental change. Such seeds come from crops naturally resistant to flooding or drought or were engineered to have such qualities. Governments or local organizations can raise awareness about the resource, but ultimately, it's up to the individual farmer to decide on which seeds to use. "Such incremental adaptation is important for local communities in dealing with climate risks," Elphin said. "However, our findings suggest a lack of preconditions for more transformational adaptation, which requires systemic change and multi-actor collaboration, building on broad societal support and a shared agreement on roles and responsibilities: a social contract for climate action and sustainability transformations." Even in high-resource countries with governments leading planning efforts or providing financial support for adaptations, Kirchhoff said, implementation still falls primarily to individuals. In the United States, for example, the government may offer guidance on flood proofing homes, but individuals are responsible for paying for these improvements. In more resource-constrained countries, the burden is even heavier. "We see impacts of climate change across the globe, and a lot of those impacts are disproportionately felt by communities or individuals who are already overburdened," Kirchhoff said. "In rural areas, especially in Africa or the global south, individuals are doing what they have the agency to do -- changing crops to something more resilient, maybe changing livelihoods from farming to fishing or even migrating. … And, while they will need to continue to take action, since they are the ones feeling the impacts the most, we still need all other actors to contribute to implementation." Co-authors include researchers from Emory University, University of Michigan, University of Miami and University of California Irvine in the United States; Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, University of Hamburg and Helmholtz Zentrum Hereon in German; Energy and Resources Institute, and Indian Institute for Human Settlements in India; University of Melbourne in Australia; University of Twente in the Netherlands; International Center for Tropical Agriculture in Senegal; University of Abomey-Calavi in the Republic of Benin; University of the West Indies in Jamaica; University of Glasgow and University of Leeds in the United Kingdom; University of Waterloo and University of Prince Edward Island in Canada; and University of Copenhagen in Denmark. The National Science Foundation, the German Research Foundation, the University of Hamburg, the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, the Natural Environment Research Council and the World Bank supported this research.

The Interconnected Disaster Risks Report 2023 published by the United Nations University -- Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS) warns of six risk tipping points ahead of us: Accelerating extinctions Groundwater depletion Mountain glaciers melting Space debris Unbearable heat Uninsurable future Systems are all around us and closely connected to us: ecosystems, food systems, water systems and more. When they deteriorate, it is typically not a simple and predictable process. Rather, instability slowly builds until suddenly a tipping point is reached and the system changes fundamentally or even collapses, with potentially catastrophic impacts. A risk tipping point is defined in the report as the moment at which a given socioecological system is no longer able to buffer risks and provide its expected functions, after which the risk of catastrophic impacts to these systems increases substantially. These diverse cases illustrate that risk tipping points extend beyond the single domains of climate, ecosystems, society or technology. Instead, they are inherently interconnected, and they are also closely linked to human activities and livelihoods. Many new risks emerge when and where our physical and natural worlds interconnect with human society. One example of a risk tipping point that the report explains is groundwater depletion. Underground water reservoirs called aquifers are an essential freshwater resource around the world, and they supply drinking water to over 2 billion people. Around 70 per cent of groundwater withdrawals are used for agriculture, oftentimes when there is not sufficient water from above-ground sources available. Today, aquifers help to mitigate half of the losses in agriculture caused by drought, a phenomenon which is only expected to increase in the future due to climate change. But the report warns that now it's the aquifers themselves that are approaching a tipping point: More than half of the world's major aquifers are being depleted faster than they can be naturally replenished. If the water table falls below a level that existing wells can access, farmers can suddenly find themselves without the ability to access water, which puts entire food production systems at risk of failure. Some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, have already surpassed this groundwater risk tipping point, others, like India, are not far from it. "As we indiscriminately extract our water resources, damage nature and biodiversity, and pollute both Earth and space, we are moving dangerously close to the brink of multiple risk tipping points that could destroy the very systems that our life depends on," said Dr. Zita Sebesvari, Lead Author of the Interconnected Disaster Risks Report and Deputy Director of UNU-EHS. "Additionally, we also lose some of our tools and options to deal with future disaster risk." The analysis reveals the cases share similar root causes and drivers which are embedded in our actions and behaviours that increasingly put pressure on our systems until they are pushed to the brink of collapse. Reaching these points means new risks will be introduced, many of which we do not yet know of. "As we approach these tipping points, we will already begin to experience the impacts. Once, crossed it will be difficult to go back," warned Dr. Jack O'Connor, Lead Author and Senior Expert at UNU-EHS. "Our report can help us see risks ahead of us, the causes behind them, and the urgent changes required to avoid them." The report does not just define and identify risk tipping points, but it also proposes a new framework to avoid or mitigate the consequences. Solutions fall into two categories: Avoid solutions, which target root causes and drivers of risk to avoid risk tipping points altogether and Adapt solutions, which help prepare or better address the negative impacts of risk tipping points if they cannot be avoided. For both Avoid and Adapt solutions, there are two type of actions. Delay actions work within the existing "business as usual" system and aim to slow down the progression toward risk tipping points or the worst impacts. But the ideal action is to Transform, which involves a fundamental reimagining of a system into something stronger and more sustainable than before. In the case of the "Unbearable heat" risk tipping point described in the report, it is human-induced climate change that is causing a global rise in temperatures, leading to more frequent and intense heat- waves that will in some areas reach temperatures in which the human body can no longer survive. An Adapt-Delay solution would aim to counteract this risk by installing air conditioners, for example. The air conditioners will delay when the risk tipping point is reached for the people in the area, but will not address the heat itself. An Avoid-Transform solution, on the other hand, would aim to halt the emissions of greenhouse gasses and at the same time drive societal change toward low-carbon ways of living so the tipping point can ultimately be avoided. The report finds that solutions being implemented today tend to focus on Delay rather than Transform, although increasing focus is being put on transformative change to achieve global goals on transitioning to a more sustainable future. It will require more game-changing solutions to move us away from a future of multiplying risk tipping points. Transformative solutions will also require considerable societal and personal effort, and the report highlights overall changes we can each make to our behaviours and values. "Real transformative change involves everyone," said Sebesvari. "The report serves as a timely reminder before the UN Climate Conference that we must all be part of the solution." Brief summaries of the 6 risk tipping points included in the report Accelerating extinctions: Intense human activities -- including land use change, overexploitation, climate change, pollution and introduction of invasive alien species -- have created a rate of species extinction at least 10 to 100 times Earth's natural rate. Ecosystems are built on intricate connections between species. If one species goes extinct, it can have knock-on effects on many others. The risk tipping point in this context is when an ecosystem loses key species that are strongly connected, triggering cascading extinctions of dependent species, which can eventually lead to the collapse of an entire ecosystem. An example is the gopher tortoise, which digs burrows that are used by more than 350 other species for breeding, feeding, protection from predators and avoiding extreme temperatures. One of these species is the endangered dusky gopher frog. If the gopher tortoise goes extinct, as foreseen, the dusky gopher frog is one species that will likely follow. But because the dusky gopher frog helps control insect populations and prevent pest outbreaks in longleaf pine forest ponds, its extinction would again trigger a number of negative effects that may become unstoppable. Groundwater depletion The risk tipping point in this context is the loss of access to freshwater resources in underground reservoirs known as aquifers. Aquifers supply drinking water to over 2 billion people, and around 70 per cent of withdrawals are used for agriculture. More than half of the world's major aquifers are being depleted faster than they can be naturally replenished. The tipping point in this case is reached when the water table falls below a level that existing wells can access, putting entire food production systems at risk of failure. Some countries have already experienced the effects. Saudi Arabia was the world's 6th-largest wheat exporter in the mid-1990s based on large-scale groundwater extraction for irrigation, but wells ran dry and the nation had to turn to wheat imports. India and other countries are currently nearing this risk tipping point, with global impacts expected to ripple through the world's food systems, economy and environment. Also affected are the very structure of society, the well-being of future generations, and the ability to manage future agricultural losses due to climate change-driven drought. Mountain glaciers melting Glaciers retreat when the ice mass that formed many years ago melts faster than it is replaced by snow. Due to global warming, the world's glaciers are now melting twice as fast than they did in the past two decades. Between 2000 and 2019, glaciers lost 267 gigatons of ice per year, which is roughly equivalent to the mass of 46,500 Great Pyramids of Giza. Glaciers store large amounts of freshwater. Meltwater from glaciers and snow supplies water for drinking, irrigation, hydropower and ecosystems to entire regions. The risk tipping point in this context is "peak water" -- the point when a glacier produces the maximum volume of water run-off due to melting. After this point, freshwater availability will steadily decline. Peak water has been reached or is expected to occur within the next 10 years for many small glaciers in Central Europe, Western Canada and South America. In the Andes, where peak water has already passed for many glaciers, communities are grappling with unreliable water sources for drinking and irrigation. For example, Peru's Quelccaya glacier, once the world's largest tropical ice cap, has shrunk by 31 per cent in the last 30 years contributing to periodic dry season water scarcity and widespread impacts. An estimated 90,000+ glaciers of the Himalayas, Karakorum and Hindu Kush mountains are currently at risk of reaching the tipping point, threatening the nearly 870 million people that rely on them. Space debris Space has a garbage problem. This is because when satellites become defunct, they are left in the Earth's orbit as space debris. Out of 34,260 objects tracked in orbit today, only around 25 per cent are working satellites. The rest are junk -- broken satellites or discarded rocket stages. Additionally, there are likely around 130 million pieces of debris too small to be tracked, measuring between 1 mm and 1 cm. Space debris travels at over 25,000 km per hour, and even the smallest debris can cause significant damage if it collides with something, creating even more debris. This is why other objects, such as the International Space Station or satellites, need to regularly conduct maneuvers to avoid it. The problem worsens as more and more objects are launched into space and debris accumulates. The risk tipping point in this context is the point at which the Earth's orbit becomes so full of debris that one collision sets off a chain reaction of collisions. If that were to happen, the orbit could become unusable, which would threaten our ability to operate satellites, for example to monitor the weather and environmental changes, and to receive early disaster warnings. More than 100,000 new spacecraft could be launched into orbit by 2030, greatly increasing the risk of this tipping point. Unbearable heat Human-induced climate change is causing a global rise in temperatures, leading to more frequent and intense heatwaves, and this is only expected to become more severe. Extreme heat was responsible for an average of 500,000 excess deaths annually in the last two decades, disproportionally affecting those who are particularly vulnerable due to their age, health conditions or profession, for example. There are weather stations in the world that have already recorded temperatures beyond the tipping point for what a human body can survive in. If this threshold is crossed for more than six hours, even a young and healthy body will suffer extreme consequences. The tipping point in this context is a so-called "wet-bulb temperature" above 35°C. A wet-bulb temperature is a measurement which combines temperature and humidity, relevant because high humidity worsens the effects of heat as it hinders the evaporation of sweat, which is needed to maintain a stable core body temperature and avoid organ failure and brain damage. Wet-bulb temperatures have crossed this critical threshold in at least two weather stations, one in the Persian Gulf and one in the Indus River Basin. Research indicates that by 2070, parts of South Asia and the Middle East will regularly surpass this threshold. By 2100 more than 70 per cent of the global population may be exposed to deadly climate conditions for at least 20 days per year. Uninsurable future: Since the 1970s, damages as a result of weather-related disasters have increased sevenfold, with 2022 alone seeing $313 billion in global economic losses and severe disasters forecast to double globally by 2040. Additionally, the number and size of at-risk areas are predicted to expand as climate change shifts the range of hazards like wildfires and storms into new areas. These changes also affect the insurance industry. Where extreme weather events increasingly wreak havoc, insurance premiums have climbed as much as 57 per cent since 2015, and some insurance companies in at-risk areas have decided to limit the amount or type of damages they can cover, cancel policies or leave the market altogether. For instance, it is predicted that more than half a million Australian homes will be uninsurable by 2030, primarily due to increasing flood risk. The risk tipping point in this context is reached when insurance becomes unavailable or unaffordable, leaving people without an economic safety net when disasters strike, which opens the door to increasing socioeconomic consequences, particularly when it is the most vulnerable parts of the population that cannot afford to move to safer areas.

The new analysis of frailties within the UK's food system has been led by researchers from the University of York and Anglia Ruskin University, and is published in the journal Sustainability . In the study, civil unrest is classified as over 30,000 people in the UK suffering violent injury in one year through events such as demonstrations and violent looting. Just over 40% of the food experts surveyed believe that civil unrest in the UK in the next 10 years was either possible (38%) or more likely than not (3%). Over the next 50 years, this increased to nearly 80% of experts believing civil unrest was either possible (45%), more likely than not (24%), or very likely (10%). The participants were then asked, if disruption to the food system was to cause the unrest, was it likely to be due to not enough food being available overall, or problems with food distribution, preventing it getting to the right places and creating isolated pockets of hunger. They were asked to consider both questions over the two time frames, 10 and 50 years. The results show that 80% of experts believe logistical distribution issues leading to shortages are the most likely food-related cause of civil unrest in the next 10 years. But, considered over a 50-year horizon, they said catastrophic failure resulting in insufficient food to feed the UK population, rather than distribution problems, would be the most likely cause. The 58 experts who took part in the research were then asked to rank the possible causes of food shortages, and the foods most likely to provoke civil unrest. Wheat, bread, pasta and cereal are thought to be the types of food most likely to lead to unrest, while extreme weather -- including storm surges, flooding, snow and drought -- was chosen as the most likely cause of food shortages and food distribution issues over both the 10-year and 50-year time frames. However, rather than one single driver (extreme weather), the food experts felt that a combination of factors -- including ecological collapse, trade restrictions, a financial crash, rogue AI, a new pandemic, and animal or plant pathogens -- was most likely. Currently just under 50% of the UK's food is imported including 80% of fruit, 50% of vegetables, and 20% of beef and poultry, while the UK is almost completely self-sufficient for wheat, barley, lamb, and potatoes. Around 85% of food imports arrive via boat, and once in the UK, 98% of all food is transported by road. The researchers' aim is to highlight the potential vulnerability of the food system and the importance of developing plans to prepare and respond to these risks. They say the food system has been optimised for efficiency rather than resilience and faces major challenges in the future -- from not just climate change, but a combination of factors that increase the level of risk. Professor Sarah Bridle, Chair of Food, Climate and Society at the University of York, said: "Covid 19, Brexit and the cost of living crisis have shown the UK is already exposed to certain risks. The food system faces significant challenges. We are experiencing an increasing number of extreme weather events, many driven by climate change. It is entirely possible that in the coming decades extreme weather will cause major crop yield failures across multiple breadbaskets. We need a food system designed not just for optimal efficiency, but also for resilience." Professor Aled Jones, Director of the Global Sustainability Institute at Anglia Ruskin University, and also lead author, said: "By mapping out the potential risks, and their possible causes, we hope this report will assist with the preparations needed to avoid a UK food system catastrophe. "Government agencies as well as business, must explore and fund options to increase the resilience of the food system including ecosystem restoration and management, storage and distribution, working conditions, sustainable farming practices, consumer engagement, as well as tackling food poverty and mitigating climate change. The Covid pandemic saw major disruption to food distribution and consumption from which lessons need to be learnt." Sue Newton, GB Food & Beverage Leader at WTW, said: "In an increasingly connected world it has never been more important for businesses to think beyond single risks and solutions. Governments and businesses need to be ready for multiple scenarios, reactive when the exact situation doesn't unfold as scripted, and aware of the art of the possible. This research supports organisations in understanding the various pathways that might unfold to feed into their risk planning, and build resilience by identifying needs to support prevention, preparedness, response and recovery planning."

That's the assertion made by an international group of scientists in one of four related research papers, all appearing in the journal Science Open: Airbursts and Cratering Impacts. The papers are the latest results in the investigation of the Younger Dryas Impact Hypothesis, the idea that an anomalous cooling of the Earth almost 13 millennia ago was the result of a cosmic impact. "In this general region, there was a change from more humid conditions that were forested and with diverse sources of food for hunter-gatherers, to drier, cooler conditions when they could no longer subsist only as hunter-gatherers," said Earth scientist James Kennett, a professor emeritus of UC Santa Barbara . The settlement at Abu Hureyra is famous among archaeologists for its evidence of the earliest known transition from foraging to farming. "The villagers started to cultivate barley, wheat and legumes," he noted. "This is what the evidence clearly shows." These days, Abu Hureyra and its rich archaeological record lie under Lake Assad, a reservoir created by construction of the Taqba Dam on the Euphrates River in the 1970s. But before this flood, archaeologists managed to extract loads of material to study. "The village occupants," the researchers state in the paper, "left an abundant and continuous record of seeds, legumes and other foods." By studying these layers of remains, the scientists were able to discern the types of plants that were being collected in the warmer, humid days before the climate changed and in the cooler, drier days after the onset of what we know now as the Younger Dryas cool period. Before the impact, the researchers found, the inhabitants' prehistoric diet involved wild legumes and wild-type grains, and "small but significant amounts of wild fruits and berries." In the layers corresponding to the time after cooling, fruits and berries disappeared and their diet shifted toward more domestic-type grains and lentils, as the people experimented with early cultivation methods. By about 1,000 years later, all of the Neolithic "founder crops" -- emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, hulled barley, rye, peas, lentils, bitter vetch, chickpeas and flax -- were being cultivated in what is now called the Fertile Crescent. Drought-resistant plants, both edible and inedible, become more prominent in the record as well, reflecting a drier climate that followed the sudden impact winter at the onset of the Younger Dryas. The evidence also indicates a significant drop in the area's population, and changes in the settlement's architecture to reflect a more agrarian lifestyle, including the initial penning of livestock and other markers of animal domestication. To be clear, Kennett said, agriculture eventually arose in several places on Earth in the Neolithic Era, but it arose first in the Levant (present-day Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, Israel and parts of Turkey) initiated by the severe climate conditions that followed the impact. And what an impact it must have been. In the 12,800-year-old layers corresponding to the shift between hunting and gathering and agriculture, the record at Abu Hureyra shows evidence of massive burning. The evidence includes a carbon-rich "black mat" layer with high concentrations of platinum, nanodiamonds and tiny metallic spherules that could only have been formed under extremely high temperatures -- higher than any that could have been produced by man's technology at the time. The airburst flattened trees and straw huts, splashing meltglass onto cereals and grains, as well as on the early buildings, tools and animal bones found in the mound -- and most likely on people, too. This event is not the only such evidence of a cosmic airburst on a human settlement. The authors previously reported a smaller but similar event which destroyed the biblical city at Tall el-Hammam in the Jordan Valley about 1600 BCE. The black mat layer, nanodiamonds and melted minerals have also been found at about 50 other sites across North and South America and Europe, the collection of which has been called the Younger Dryas strewnfield. According to the researchers, it's evidence of a widespread simultaneous destructive event, consistent with a fragmented comet that slammed into the Earth's atmosphere. The explosions, fires and subsequent impact winter, they say, caused the extinction of most large animals, including the mammoths, saber-toothed cats, American horses, and American camels, as well as the collapse of the North American Clovis culture. Because the impact appears to have produced an aerial explosion there is no evidence of craters in the ground. "But a crater is not required," Kennett said. "Many accepted impacts have no visible crater." The scientists continue to compile evidence of relatively lower-pressure cosmic explosions -- the kind that occur when the shockwave originates in the air and travels downward to the Earth's surface. "Shocked quartz is well known and is probably the most robust proxy for a cosmic impact," he continued. Only forces on par with cosmic-level explosions could have produced the microscopic deformations within quartz sand grains at the time of the impacts, and these deformations have been found in abundance in the minerals gathered from impact craters. This "crème de la crème" of cosmic impact evidence has also been identified at Abu Hureyra and at other Younger Dryas Boundary (YDB) sites, despite an absence of craters. However, it has been argued that the kind of shock-fractured quartz found in the YDB sites is not equivalent to that found in the large crater-forming sites, so the researchers worked to link these deformations to lower-pressure cosmic events. To do so, they turned to humanmade explosions of the magnitude of cosmic airbursts: nuclear tests conducted at the Alamogordo Bombing Range in New Mexico in 1945 and in Kazakhstan, in 1949 and 1953. Similar to cosmic airbursts, the nuclear explosions occurred above ground, sending shockwaves toward Earth. "In the papers, we characterize what the morphologies are of these shock fractures in these lower-pressure events," Kennett said. "And we did this because we wanted to compare it with what we have in the shock-fractured quartz in the Younger Dryas Boundary, to see if there was any comparison or similarities between what we see at the Trinity atomic test site and other atomic bomb explosions." Between the shocked quartz at the nuclear test sites and the quartz found at Abu Hureyra, the scientists found close associations in their characteristics, namely glass-filled shock fractures, indicative of temperatures greater than 2,000 degrees Celsius, above the melting point of quartz. "For the first time, we propose that shock metamorphism in quartz grains exposed to an atomic detonation is essentially the same as during a low-altitude, lower-pressure cosmic airburst," Kennett said. However, the so-called "lower pressure" is still very high -- probably greater than 3 GPa or about 400,000 pounds per square inch, equivalent to about five 737 airplanes stacked on a small coin. The novel protocol the researchers developed for identifying shock fractures in quartz grains will be useful in identifying previously unknown airbursts that are estimated to recur every few centuries to millennia. Taken together, the evidence presented by these papers, according to the scientists, "implies a novel causative link among extraterrestrial impacts, hemispheric environmental and climatic change, and transformative shifts in human societies and culture, including agricultural development."

The Chorrillo Formation formed around 70 million years ago, during the Maastrichtian age at the very end of the Cretaceous period. At this time, southern Patagonia was a warm, seasonally humid landscape of freshwater floodplains, home to creatures like dinosaurs, turtles, frogs, and various mammals. The new fossil unearthed in this formation is largely intact, including a skull and jaws with visible details, as well as multiple bones from the body. This crocodile-like apex predator may have reached around 3.5 meters (11.5 feet) long and weighed around 250 kilograms (551 pounds), with a wide, powerful jaw and big teeth capable of devouring large prey -- likely including medium-sized dinosaurs. The researchers named the species Kostensuchus atrox , referring to the Patagonian wind known in the Tehuelche native language as the Kosten and the Egyptian crocodile-headed god known as Souchos , with atrox meaning "fierce" or "harsh." K. atrox itself is not a dinosaur, but rather a peirosaurid crocodyliform, an extinct group of reptiles related to modern crocodiles and alligators. This species is the second-largest predator known to scientists from the Maastrichtian Chorrillo Formation, and the researchers believe it was likely one of the top predators in the region. K. atrox is also the first crocodyliform fossil found in the Chorrillo Formation, and one of the most intact peirosaurid crocodyliforms ever found, giving scientists unique new insight into these prehistoric animals and their ecosystem. Funding: DP 9282-R-22 National Geographic Society. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. ISC Faperj E-26/200.998/2024 Fundação Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. ISC CNPq 303596/2016-3 Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

"Finding even more jaguars and other mammals in the study area following the 2020 wildfire and extreme drought suggests that it may serve as a climate refuge, buffering the effects of extreme climate events," said Charlotte Eriksson, a post-doctoral scholar at Oregon State University. The 36,700-acre site is a seasonally flooded protected area in the northern portion of the Brazilian Pantanal, the largest freshwater wetland in the world. Past research by Eriksson and others at Oregon State and in Brazil found the site is home to a population of jaguars that are unique because their diet primarily consists of aquatic organisms, instead of land-based animals, and because they are more socially tolerant and willing to share space with other jaguars. For the new study, published in Global Change Biology , the researchers, who have studied the jaguars since 2014, used video of jaguars and other mammals they captured from field cameras they deployed before, during and after the wildfire. They also collected nearly 175 jaguar scats to analyze the jaguars' diet. The study site, much of which is federally protected, is five hours from the nearest town and can only be accessed by humans via boat. There are no roads, trails or settlements nearby. Researchers cover themselves from head to toe because of the abundance of biting insects. Eriksson has been working on the project since 2017, first as a doctoral student in Oregon State Professor Taal Levi's lab and now as a post-doctoral scholar. She visited the study site in 2018 and 2021. Jaguars are the most frequently detected mammals detected by the cameras, which is highly unusual for a large, solitary carnivore, Eriksson said. She said that would be similar to most frequently seeing a cougar or mountain lion on cameras in North America, instead of for example deer. She said that whenever she got off the boat, she would see jaguar tracks. In fact, one of her cameras recorded a jaguar just seven minutes after she set it up. "I have never been to a place where the presence of a large carnivore is so obvious," she said. The 2020 wildfires, driven by extreme drought, extreme temperatures and human activities, burned more than 11 million acres, including half the study site, and caused an estimated loss of 17 million vertebrates. In the just-published paper, the researchers set out to understand the short-term impacts of the fire and long-term effects of drought on the population of jaguars and other mammals and whether the changes were driven by fire, drought or both. Findings included: The researchers caution against generalizing their findings to other areas because of the unique nature of this part of the Pantanal, including the fact that parts of it are protected, but they emphasize the importance of maintaining such refugia and implementing proactive fire management.

These fossils, which date back to the late Triassic period around 209 million years ago, preserve a snapshot of a dynamic ecosystem where older groups of animals, including giant amphibians and armored crocodile relatives, lived alongside evolutionary upstarts like frogs, turtles and pterosaurs. "The site captures the transition to more modern terrestrial vertebrate communities where we start seeing groups that thrive later in the Mesozoic living alongside these older animals that don't make it past the Triassic," Kligman said. "Fossil beds like these enable us to establish that all of these animals actually lived together." The new site helps fill in a gap in the fossil record that predates the end-Triassic extinction (ETE). Around 201.5 million years ago, volcanic eruptions associated with the break-up of the supercontinent Pangaea dramatically altered global climates and wiped out roughly 75% of the species on Earth. This cleared the way for newer groups, like dinosaurs, to diversify and dominate ecosystems worldwide. Direct evidence of this transition on land is difficult to find due to a lack of terrestrial fossil outcrops from right before the ETE. However, there are few better places to look than Petrified Forest National Park, which is famed for its Triassic fossil beds and colorful deposits of petrified wood. One of the park's geologic outcrops, the Owl Rock Member, is rich in volcanic ash. Minerals within the ash have allowed researchers to date the Owl Rock layer to around 209 million years old, making them among the park's youngest rocks. These rocks are also among the park's least studied according to William Parker, a paleontologist at Petrified Forest National Park and co-author of the new study. The exposures of the Owl Rock Member at the park are found in very remote areas and therefore have not received the same attention as other geological members in the park. In 2011, a team co-led by research geologist Kay Behrensmeyer, the National Museum of Natural History's curator of vertebrate paleontology, braved the area's rugged badlands, which are home to rattlesnakes and wild horses. They were searching for fossils of prehistoric precursors to mammals and ended up discovering a bonebed containing an entire Triassic ecosystem. "That's the fun thing about paleontology: you go looking for one thing, and then you find something else that's incredible that you weren't expecting," said Kligman, who began working on this site as part of his doctorate in 2018. This part of northeastern Arizona was positioned in the middle of Pangaea and sat just above the equator 209 million years ago. The area's semi-arid environment was crisscrossed by small river channels and likely prone to seasonal floods. These floods washed sediment and volcanic ash into the channels. One of these floods likely buried the creatures preserved in the bonebed. The site is so rich in small fossils that excavating them all in the field was impossible. So the team encased large pieces of the surrounding sediment in plaster and brought them back to prepare in the lab. Many of these sediment blocks ended up at the museum's FossiLab, where a team of volunteers spent thousands of hours, often in view of curious museum visitors, carefully chiseling rock away from bones under the microscope. In total, the team has uncovered more than 1,200 individual fossils, including bones, teeth, fish scales and coprolites, or fossilized poop. This assemblage contains 16 different groups of vertebrate animals that once inhabited a diverse ecosystem. The region's braided rivers were filled with fish, like freshwater sharks and coelacanths, as well as ancient amphibians, some of which grew up to 6 feet long. The surrounding environment was home to fearsome reptiles that evolved earlier in the Triassic, including armored herbivores and toothy predators that resembled giant crocodiles. Living alongside these strange creatures were a variety of more familiar critters, including relatives of tuataras and early frogs. The researchers also described the fossils of an ancient turtle with spike-like armor and a shell that could fit inside a shoebox. This tortoise-like animal lived around the same time as the oldest known turtle, whose fossils were previously uncovered in Germany. "This suggests that turtles rapidly dispersed across Pangaea, which is surprising for an animal that is not very large and is likely walking at a slow pace," Kligman said. The turtle was not the only evolutionary newcomer at this site. The new species of pterosaur the team discovered is one of the oldest species of pterosaur found outside of Europe. The winged reptile would have been small enough to comfortably perch on a person's shoulder. The remarkable fossil was unearthed by preparator Suzanne McIntire, who volunteered in the museum's FossiLab for 18 years. "What was exciting about uncovering this specimen was that the teeth were still in the bone, so I knew the animal would be much easier to identify," McIntire said. The tooth-studded jaw revealed crucial clues about how the earliest pterosaurs lived. Because the tips of the teeth were worn down, the team concluded that the pterosaur likely fed on the site's fish, many of which were encased in armor-like scales. The team named the new pterosaur species Eotephradactylus mcintireae . The generic name means 'ash-winged dawn goddess' and references the site's volcanic ash and the animals' position near the base of the pterosaur evolutionary tree. The species name references its discoverer, McIntire, who retired last year. The bonebed is the latest research collaboration between the National Museum of Natural History and Petrified Forest National Park. Smithsonian scientists have collected petrified wood, fossils and archaeological objects from the region since the turn of the 20th century. In addition to Kligman and Behrensmeyer, the new paper included contributions from Adam Fitch, who is also affiliated with the National Museum of Natural History. The study also includes authors affiliated with Columbia College Chicago, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Denver Museum of Nature & Science and Petrified Forest National Park. The research was supported by the Peter Buck Postdoctoral Fellowship Program, the Smithsonian, Petrified Forest Museum Association, the National Park Service, Columbia College Chicago and the U.S. National Science Foundation.

"We've monitored mercury in Arctic animals for over 40 years. Despite declining global emissions since the 1970s, we see no corresponding decrease in Arctic concentrations -- on the contrary," says Professor Rune Dietz from Aarhus University. Mercury released into the atmosphere from sources like coal combustion and gold mining can remain airborne for about a year. However, once it enters the ocean, it can persist for over 300 years. This means that even with current emission reductions, the Arctic may continue to experience elevated mercury levels for centuries. Mercury's Fingerprint in Arctic Wildlife The researchers analyzed over 700 environmental samples -- including tissues from polar bears, seals, fish, and peat -- from across Greenland collected over the past 40 years. By examining the composition of six common mercury isotopes, they identified distinct regional differences that align with ocean current patterns. "These isotope signatures act like fingerprints, revealing the sources and transport pathways of mercury," explains Senior Researcher Jens Søndergaard from Aarhus University. For example, central West Greenland is influenced by Atlantic inflow via the Irminger Current, while other regions are dominated by Arctic Ocean currents. Implications for Global Mercury Regulation Mercury is a potent neurotoxin. In Arctic top predators like polar bears and toothed whales, concentrations are now 20-30 times higher than before industrialization. This poses serious health risks not only to wildlife but also to Indigenous communities that rely on marine mammals for food. "Mercury affects the immune system, reproduction, and possibly sensory functions in animals, which can impact their survival," says Professor Christian Sonne from Aarhus University. The findings have significant implications for the UN's Minamata Convention on Mercury, which aims to reduce global mercury pollution. The study offers a potential explanation for why mercury levels in Arctic biota remain high despite falling atmospheric emissions. "Transport of mercury from major sources like China to Greenland via ocean currents can take up to 150 years," says Rune Dietz. "This helps explain the lack of decline in Arctic mercury levels." Looking Ahead The research team is continuing their work on mercury isotopes across the Arctic through the "GreenPath" project, funded by the Independent Research Fund Denmark. The isotopic analyses also contribute to international projects such as WhaleAdapt and ArcSolutions.

The study was published today in BioScience. "We're at the start of an existential crisis for the Earth's wild animals," said Oregon State University's William Ripple, who led the study. "Up till now, the primary cause of biodiversity loss has been the twin threats of overexploitation and habitat alteration, but as climate change intensifies, we expect it to become a third major threat to the Earth's animals." Ripple, distinguished professor of ecology in the OSU College of Forestry, and collaborators in the U.S. and Mexico used publicly available biodiversity datasets to examine animal data for 70,814 species from 35 existing classes. They categorized the species by class and climate change risks as assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. The researchers found that at least one-quarter of the species in six different classes are threatened by climate change; these classes include arachnids and chilopodans (centipedes) as well as anthozoans and hydrozoans (marine invertebrates related to jellyfish and corals). Smaller percentages of other classes' species are also directly at risk from a warming climate. "We are particularly concerned about invertebrate animals in the ocean, which absorbs most of the heat from climate change," Ripple said. "Those animals are increasingly vulnerable because of their limited ability to move and promptly evade adverse conditions." Sudden impacts on animal communities can take the form of mass mortality from extreme events like heat waves, wildfires, droughts and floods. "The cascading effects of more and more mass mortality events will likely affect carbon cycle feedbacks and nutrient cycling," Ripple said. "Those effects also likely will have an impact on species interactions such as predation, competition, pollination and parasitism, which are vital for ecosystem function." The 90% reduction in mollusk populations along Israel's coastline because of escalating water temperatures shows how susceptible invertebrates are, he said. Other examples include the deaths of billions of intertidal invertebrates during the 2021 Pacific Northwest heat dome, and the catastrophic die-off of corals across 29% of the Great Barrier Reef following a severe 2016 marine heat wave. Mass mortalities have not been limited to invertebrates, Ripple notes. In 2015 and 2016, about 4 million common murres off the west coast of North America starved to death via an altered food web caused by an extreme marine heat wave. The same heat wave caused a 71% decline in Pacific cod because of an increase in metabolic demand and a reduced prey base, and marine heat waves have likely played a role in the deaths of approximately 7,000 humpback whales in the North Pacific. Further cause for concern, the authors note, is the comparatively small amount of information that's been gathered regarding climate change risk to wildlife. Most wildlife classes (66 of 101) have not yet had any species assessed by the IUCN, and the 70,814 species that have been assessed represent 5.5% of all described wildlife species alive today. "Our analysis is meant to be a preliminary effort toward assessing climate risk to wildlife species," Ripple said. "Understanding the risk is crucial for making informed policy decisions. We need a global database on mass mortality events due to climate change for animal species in all ecosystems, and an acceleration in assessing currently ignored species." The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, he notes, has a bias toward vertebrates, which make up less than 6% of the Earth's named animal species. "There is also a need for more frequent climate risk assessments of all species and better consideration of adaptive capacity," Ripple said. "We need the integration of biodiversity and climate change policy planning on a global scale." Roger Worthington, an attorney in Bend, Oregon, provided partial funding for this study, which also included Christopher Wolf and Jillian Gregg of Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Associates and Erik Torres-Romero of the Biotechnology Engineering-Polytechnic University of Puebla in Puebla, Mexico.

Early in the Age of Dinosaurs, alligator-sized amphibians called metoposaurid temnospondyls were common in freshwater habitats. Several fossil sites contain large concentrations of temnospondyls buried together, but determining how these bonebeds formed is often difficult due to a lack of context or detailed examination. In this study, Kufner and colleagues perform an in-depth assessment of a site called Nobby Knob in Dubois, Wyoming, where fossil remains of a temnospondyl called Buettnererpeton bakeri were found in rocks dating to roughly 230 million years ago. Fine-grained ancient soils and finely layered sediments indicate that these fossils were buried in a floodplain setting. Unlike similar sites, the water was evidently very calm, since even very delicate parts of the skeletons are preserved intact, and the bones aren't arranged in any pattern that would suggest strong currents. The authors conclude that these animals may have concentrated in this area as a breeding colony or because of restricted waterways due to drought and were ultimately buried together where they died. This assemblage represents more than of half of the known fossils of Buettnererpeton, providing an excellent opportunity for future study of the species. Whether or not this kind of die-off was common among temnospondyls is difficult to assess since few other sites have received this level of detailed examination and there is limited data regarding how temnospondyl burial varies with different environments. The authors suggest these as directions for future research. "This assemblage is a snapshot of a single population rather than an accumulation over time" said Kufner, "that more than doubles the number of known Buettnererpeton bakeri individuals." Whether or not this kind of die-off was common among temnospondyls is difficult to assess considering most bonebeds of this group represent accumulations that were transported from the site of death. Few other metoposaurid sites have received this level of detailed examination highlighting the importance of mapping and systematic data collection during excavation and preparation of mass mortality beds. The Nobby Knob fossil assemblage provides an excellent opportunity for future research into Late Triassic ecosystems and metoposaurid biology.

A UC Davis study, published in the journal Ecosphere , is the first to document Putah Creek-origin salmon. Chinook salmon have been observed at the creek since 2014, but prior studies had shown them to be strays from hatcheries. This study now confirms that some salmon returning to Putah Creek in the fall to spawn are actually born there. This should not be news. Salmon are famous for their simple life cycle: Hatch in a stream, migrate to the ocean, and return to the stream to spawn at their life's end. Yet salmon in 21st century California are sometimes trucked or flown to the ocean from hatcheries due to dams, habitat loss, warming streams, drought and other threats restricting their natural migration. This study shows that at Putah Creek -- and potentially other altered and dam-controlled streams worldwide -- restored waterways can help restore and even create salmon runs. "The fact that you have Putah Creek-origin fish is a big deal," said senior author Andrew Rypel, director of the UC Davis Center for Watershed Sciences at the time of the study. "To have a growing, stable population that's natal means it's a well-managed ecosystem. It means we're taking care of the water and the land the right way, and that there's a future for fish in that place. It also shows there's hope for other streams that are degraded." Water brought back birds, bugs and salmon Putah Creek is a tributary of the Sacramento River, flowing through the cities of Winters and Davis. It barely flowed at all after Monticello Dam was installed in the 1950s, which created Lake Berryessa and drastically reduced water to Putah Creek. Then, in 2000, a lawsuit brought about the Putah Creek Accord, which mandated year-round flows to protect fish and habitat. Since then, local community members, nonprofits, state agencies and UC Davis researchers have worked to restore and study the creek. They've found that once water returned to the stream, so did insects, songbirds, and eventually, salmon. Hatchery fish and new wild salmon Until this study, the hundreds of salmon in Putah Creek were all thought to be hatchery strays. "People began speculating whether any of these Putah Creek-spawning fish were returning to Putah Creek," said Rypel, a professor in the UC Davis Wildlife, Fish and Conservation Biology department. "It was a challenging scientific riddle to figure out." First author Lauren Hitt, a graduate student in Rypel's lab during the study, used otoliths -- or ear bones -- from adult Chinook salmon carcasses recovered from Putah Creek between 2016 and 2021 to determine their origin. No bigger than a thumbnail, otoliths carry within them the water chemistry of the streams they have traveled, allowing scientists to map their movements and migrations against the chemical tracers of individual streams. This powerful technique allowed Hitt to reconstruct each salmon's life history. She showed that while hatchery-origin fish were most abundant, a handful -- 11 of 407 -- of returning salmon analyzed were born in Putah Creek, completing their full life cycle as wild salmon. This new run of wild salmon at Putah Creek descended from hatchery fish -- a finding that could upend some long-held perspectives about the role of fish hatcheries in conservation. Hatcheries provide food and a fishing boost for anglers, yet they have often been criticized for impacts to wild fish genetics, health and habitat. "The idea that hatcheries can be part of the solution might take people off guard," Rypel said. "But there may be positive effects so long as the salmon have a good place to go. There's a lot of potential to have more Putah Creeks out there." Local love Salmon born in Putah Creek face many challenges in completing their life cycle. They must leave Lower Putah Creek, enter the Yolo Bypass floodplain, travel to Liberty Island, down the Sacramento River and into the San Francisco Bay before emptying into the Pacific Ocean. At the end of their life, they get to do this in reverse. Along the way, restricted fish passage, reduced flows, too-warm, too little or too much water at the wrong time can be fatal. In a sobering illustration of these risks, Putah Creek-origin salmon from 2021 died before being able to spawn because an atmospheric river sent debris and ammonia-saturated waters into Putah Creek just as spawning salmon were beginning to arrive. The authors say such setbacks are significant but not insurmountable provided collaborative management of Putah Creek in the future. "There's so much local love for these fish," said Hitt, currently a Ph.D. student at University of Canterbury in New Zealand. "I hope people recognize that their caring about the system and advocating for the system are what made the changes possible. If not for local community engaged and supporting local streams, I don't think we'd have salmon in Putah Creek today of hatchery or Putah Creek origin. This is just so special." A salmon run at UC Davis As for UC Davis' salmon run? Scientists will continue to sample and monitor the fish as they come home. Visitors and community members may see salmon spawning each fall at the Putah Creek Riparian Reserve and throughout the creek. The study's additional coauthors include Malte Willmes of Norwegian Institute for Nature Research; Rachel Johnson of National Marine Fisheries Service and UC Davis; and George Whitman, Mackenzie Miner, Carson Jeffres, Dennis Cocherell and Nann Fangue of UC Davis. The study was funded by the Solano County Water Agency, Yolo Basin Foundation, UC Davis Agricultural Experiment Station, Peter B. Moyle and California Trout Endowment for Coldwater Fish Conservation, and UC Davis Erica Kelly Memorial Award and Jastro-Shields Research Award funds.

To help answer these questions, researchers are turning to an unlikely animal: tiny, days-old zebrafish. The millimeters-long, translucent zebrafish may not get depressed exactly like humans do, but the fish do exhibit a "giving up" behavior: they stop swimming after they realize they aren't getting anywhere -- a passive behavior that scientists use to study depression in animals. By taking advantage of this behavior, the ability to image the zebrafish's entire brain, and a unique virtual reality system, a team of researchers from HHMI's Janelia Research Campus, Harvard, and Johns Hopkins found where ketamine acts in the zebrafish brain: at supporting cells called astroglia, rather than neurons. Previous research by Janelia scientists found that astroglia act as a counter that tells the fish when to give up. As the fish registers that it isn't getting anywhere, it swims harder, and astroglia activity ramps up. When astroglia activity reaches a threshold, the cells signal to neurons for the fish to stop swimming. The new research finds that a brief exposure to ketamine causes a lasting suppression of the "giving up" behavior by overstimulating astroglia. This overstimulation, which occurs through ketamine's stimulation of noradrenergic neurons that activate astrocytes, appears to subsequently reduce the astroglia counter's sensitivity, causing the fish to continue swimming normally, even when it isn't getting anywhere. "Our paper suggests that these astroglia, this non-neuronal cell population, are playing a very important role, and that some of the key effects of these antidepressant compounds go through changes in astroglial physiology," says Alex Chen, a joint PhD student in the Ahrens Lab at Janelia and the Engert Lab at Harvard and a co-lead author on the paper. The team's findings, which also show that astrocytes are similarly activated in mice, could help researchers get a clearer picture of how antidepressants work in the brain, potentially leading to the development of safer and more effective drugs to treat depression. Understanding how antidepressants work on a molecular level has confounded scientists for decades, with much of their work focused on the drugs' effects on neurons. "I think our research suggests that targeting these astrocytes to find new treatments could be an interesting way to go," says Marc Duque Ramírez, a PhD student in the Engert Lab and a co-lead author on the paper. Using zebrafish to test ketamine The project started when the team, led by Duque and Chen, wanted to see if they could use zebrafish to test antidepressants that were known to work in humans and had previously been tested in rodents. Because zebrafish are small and translucent, researchers can image each animal's entire brain to better track the drug's effects. The Ahrens Lab had shown in earlier work that zebrafish exhibit a trait known as futility-induced passivity, or "giving up" -- a behavior that has also been seen in rodents. Using a virtual reality setup, the researchers fixed the fish in place and showed them different visual patterns. When the fish saw a pattern simulating backward motion, they wiggled their tails as though swimming forward. When the pattern changed to one simulating being stuck in place, the animals would struggle at first, then give up, become passive, and stop swimming. In the new work, the researchers show that ketamine suppressed this giving up behavior for over a day. Although the fish still struggled when their swimming was not effective, they did not give up as easily and were less passive. The authors also tested other fast-acting antidepressants, such as psychedelic compounds, and found a reduction in passivity like they saw with ketamine. On the other hand, stress-inducing treatments, such as chronic glucocorticoids, increased the giving up behavior. Imaging reveals action on astroglia Next, the team turned their attention to what the drug was doing in the fish's brain. Previous research by the Ahrens Lab found the giving up action is associated with a type of glial cell called radial astrocytes. Whole-brain imaging revealed that ketamine increased the amount of calcium at the astrocytes, showing that the drug activated these cells for many minutes after administration. The researchers think that although short or fast increases in astroglia calcium might drive giving up behavior, the aftereffects of the ketamine-induced flood of calcium reduce the astroglia's response to the futility signal that drives giving up behavior, making the fish more robust in these behavioral situations, or less likely to give up, in the future. "It's desensitized because during ketamine it was so hyperactivated," says Janelia Senior Group Leader Misha Ahrens, a senior author on the paper. "It's like when you take a cold shower -- afterwards you are a little less sensitive to the cold -- but at a cellular and molecular level." The researchers also found that this same mechanism was at work in mammals. Eric Hsu, a graduate student at Johns Hopkins and a co-lead author on the paper, found that astrocytes were similarly activated in mice, both when they exhibit "giving up" behavior and when they are exposed to ketamine. "This evidence of cross-species conservation increases the likelihood that comparable mechanisms exist in humans," says Dwight Bergles, a professor of neuroscience at Johns Hopkins and a senior author on the paper. The team's study demonstrates that ketamine is acting on the astrocytes by increasing norepinephrine levels, though how it does that and how that changes neuronal and astroglia physiology as a result is still unknown. But the findings do point to a potential role for astroglia in depression and could help inform future research. "We need to be careful in taking these results too literally, but this could be a model for pieces of the mammalian brain," Ahrens says.

A team from Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis and Northwestern University in Chicago has developed a device that may rescue people from overdose without bystander help. In animal studies, the researchers found that the implantable device detects an overdose, rapidly delivers naloxone to prevent death and can alert emergency first responders. The findings are available Oct. 23 in Science Advances . "Naloxone has saved many lives," said Robert W. Gereau, PhD, the Dr. Seymour and Rose T. Brown Professor of Anesthesiology and director of the WashU Medicine Pain Center. "But during an overdose, people are often alone and unable to realize they are overdosing. If someone else is present, they need access to naloxone -- also known as Narcan -- and need to know how to use it within minutes. We identified an opportunity to save more lives by developing a device that quickly administers naloxone to at-risk individuals without human intervention." Prescription opioids -- such as oxycodone -- have helped people manage the physical and mental challenges of daily debilitating pain. But the addictive properties of painkillers can lead to their misuse and abuse, which are among the driving forces behind the opioid epidemic. In addition, cheap and easy-to-access synthetic drugs -- fentanyl, for example -- have flooded the illicit market. Such ultrapotent drugs have accelerated the rise in overdose deaths in the U.S. and were responsible for roughly 70% of such deaths in 2023. The researchers worked with experts in engineering and material sciences led by John A. Rogers, PhD, a professor of materials science and engineering, biomedical engineering and neurological surgery at Northwestern University, to develop a device - the Naloximeter -- that uses a drop in oxygen levels as a signal for a potential overdose. Overdosing on opioids leads to slow and shallow breathing. Minutes after the drugs begin to impact respiratory function, breathing stops. Implanted under the skin, the Naloximeter senses oxygen in the surrounding tissues, sending a warning notification to a mobile application if the levels drop below a threshold. If the user doesn't abort the rescue process within 30 seconds, the device releases stored naloxone. The researchers implanted the device in the neck, chest or back of small and large animals. The device detected signs of overdose within a minute of dropping oxygen levels, and all animals fully recovered within five minutes of receiving naloxone from the devices. Naloxone displaces harmful opioids from receptors on the surface of brain cells, altering the cells' activity. But the drug doesn't stick around; when the opioids reoccupy and reactivate the receptors, overdose symptoms can return. To provide additional support, the device relays an emergency alert to first responders. "An additional benefit of calling first responders is that it helps people re-engage with health-care providers," said Jose Moron-Concepcion, PhD, the Henry E. Mallinckrodt Professor of Anesthesiology at WashU Medicine and an author on the study. "We want to save people from dying from an overdose and also reduce harm from opioids by helping people access the resources and treatments to prevent future overdoses from occurring." The researchers were awarded a patent -- with some help from the Office of Technology Management at WashU -- to protect the intellectual property of the device. They are evolving the technology while also looking for industry partners in preparation for deployment on a larger scale and testing of the device in clinical trials with people. "The Naloximeter is a proof-of-concept platform that isn't limited to the opioid crisis," said Joanna Ciatti, a graduate student in Rogers' lab. "This technology has far-reaching implications for those threatened by other emergent medical conditions such as anaphylaxis or epilepsy. Our study lays important groundwork for future clinical translation. We hope others in the field can build off of these findings to help make autonomous rescue devices a reality." Ciatti JL, Vazquez-Guardado A, Brings VE, Park J, Ruyle B, Ober RA, McLuckie AJ, Talcott MR, Carter EA, Burrell AR, Sponenburg RA, Trueb J, Gupta P, Kim J, Avila R, Seong M, Slivicki RA, Kaplan MA, Villalpando-Hernandez B, Massaly N, Montana MC, Pet M, Huang Y, Morón JA, Gereau IV RW, Rogers JA. An autonomous implantable device for the prevention of death from opioid overdose. Science Advances . Oct. 23, 2024. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) through the Helping to End Addiction Long-Term (HEAL) Initiative, grant numbers UG3DA050303 and UH3DA050303; the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship, grant number DGE-2234667; North Carolina State University, grant number 201473-02139; the NIH, grant number T32GM108539. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the views of the NIH. Ciatti JL, Vazquez-Guardado A, Brings VE, Ruyle B, Morón JA, Gereau IV RW, Rogers JA have been awarded a patent (number: WO2022261492A1) based on the research described in this manuscript.

The paper, published today in BioScience and written in collaboration with researchers from the Smithsonian's National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute (NZCBI), Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum and others, outlines a roadmap to create a lunar biorepository, including ideas for governance, the types of biological material to be stored and a plan for experiments to understand and address challenges such as radiation and microgravity. The study also demonstrates the successful cryopreservation of skin samples from a fish, which are now stored at the National Museum of Natural History. "Initially, a lunar biorepository would target the most at-risk species on Earth today, but our ultimate goal would be to cryopreserve most species on Earth," said Mary Hagedorn, a research cryobiologist at NZCBI and lead author of the paper. "We hope that by sharing our vision, our group can find additional partners to expand the conversation, discuss threats and opportunities and conduct the necessary research and testing to make this biorepository a reality." The proposal takes inspiration from the Global Seed Vault in Svalbard, Norway, which contains more than 1 million frozen seed varieties and functions as a backup for the world's crop biodiversity in case of global disaster. By virtue of its location in the Arctic nearly 400 feet underground, the vault was intended to be capable of keeping its seed collection frozen without electricity. However, in 2017, thawing permafrost threatened the collection with a flood of meltwater. The seed vault has since been waterproofed, but the incident showed that even an Arctic, subterranean bunker could be vulnerable to climate change. Unlike seeds, animal cells require much lower storage temperatures for preservation (-320 degrees Fahrenheit or -196 degrees Celsius). On Earth, cryopreservation of animal cells requires a supply of liquid nitrogen, electricity and human staff. Each of these three elements are potentially vulnerable to disruptions that could destroy an entire collection, Hagedorn said. To reduce these vulnerabilities, scientists needed a way to passively maintain cryopreservation storage temperatures. Since such cold temperatures do not naturally exist on Earth, Hagedorn and her co-authors looked to the moon. The moon's polar regions feature numerous craters that never receive sunlight due to their orientation and depth. These so-called permanently shadowed regions can be −410 degrees Fahrenheit (−246 degrees Celsius) -- more than cold enough for passive cryopreservation storage. To block out the DNA-damaging radiation present in space, samples could be stored underground or inside a structure with thick walls made of moon rocks. At the Hawai?i Institute of Marine Biology, the research team cryopreserved skin samples from a reef fish called the starry goby. The fins contain a type of skin cell called fibroblasts, the primary material to be stored in the National Museum of Natural History's biorepository. When it comes to cryopreservation, fibroblasts have several advantages over other types of commonly cryopreserved cells such as sperm, eggs and embryos. Science cannot yet reliably preserve the sperm, eggs and embryos of most wildlife species. However, for many species, fibroblasts can be cryopreserved easily. In addition, fibroblasts can be collected from an animal's skin, which is simpler than harvesting eggs or sperm. For species that do not have skin per se, such as invertebrates, Hagedorn said the team may use a diversity of types of samples depending on the species, including larvae and other reproductive materials. The next steps are to begin a series of radiation exposure tests for the cryopreserved fibroblasts on Earth to help design packaging that could safely deliver samples to the moon. The team is actively seeking partners and support to conduct additional experiments on Earth and aboard the International Space Station. Such experiments would provide robust testing for the prototype packaging's ability to withstand the radiation and microgravity associated with space travel and storage on the moon. If their idea becomes a reality, the researchers envision the lunar biorepository as a public entity to include public and private funders, scientific partners, countries and public representatives with mechanisms for cooperative governance akin to the Svalbard Global Seed Bank. "We aren't saying what if the Earth fails -- if the Earth is biologically destroyed this biorepository won't matter," Hagedorn said. "This is meant to help offset natural disasters and, potentially, to augment space travel. Life is precious and, as far as we know, rare in the universe. This biorepository provides another, parallel approach to conserving Earth's precious biodiversity." The study was co-authored by Hagedorn and Pierre Comizzoli of NZCBI, Lynne Parenti of the National Museum of Natural History and Robert Craddock of the National Air and Space Museum. Collaborators from other institutions include Paula Mabee of the U.S. National Science Foundation's National Ecological Observatory Network (Battelle); Bonnie Meinke of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research; Susan Wolf and John Bischof of the University of Minnesota; and Rebecca Sandlin, Shannon Tessier and Mehmet Toner of Harvard Medical School.

Spectacular ochre paintings of a wide variety of animal species, including depictions of animals and humans transforming into one another, indicate the rich mythology that guided generations of indigenous Amazonians. And while the images found adorning the rocky outcrop of Cerro Azul in the Serranía de la Lindosa have yet to be accurately dated, associated evidence of human activity suggests they are likely to have served as galleries for thousands of years, as far back as 10,500BC. The research, led by an international team from the University of Exeter, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín and the Universidad Nacional de Colombia, and published in the Journal of Anthropological Archaeology, integrated zooarchaeological analysis of animal remains recovered from nearby excavations with analysis of the artistic depictions. The animal remains revealed a diverse diet, including fish, a range of small to large mammals, and reptiles, including turtle, snake, and crocodile. However, the proportions of animal bones do not match the proportional representation of animals, suggesting the artists did not just paint what they ate. "These rock art sites include the earliest evidence of humans in western Amazonia, dating back 12,500 years ago," says Dr Mark Robinson, Associate Professor of Archaeology in Exeter's Department of Archaeology and History. "As such, the art is an amazing insight into how these first settlers understood their place in the world and how they formed relationships with animals. The context demonstrates the complexity of Amazonian relationships with animals, both as a food source but also as revered beings, which had supernatural connections and demanded complex negotiations from ritual specialists." Archaeologists have documented several significant rock art sites in the region since a peace agreement between the Colombian government and FARC in 2016 paved the way for a safe resumption of scientific investigations. Cerro Azul, a free-standing table-top hill located close to the Guayabero River in the northwest of the Department of Guaviare, was among them. There, 16 'panels' of ochre drawings were found, several of which could only be accessed via strenuous climbing and the use of ropes. The research team, which included academics from the UK, Colombia, and Germany, chose to focus on six panels in detail. These ranged from the 40m-by-10m El Más Largo, which contained more than 1,000 images, to the much smaller, 10m-by-6m panel called Principal, many of whose 244 images are extremely well-preserved in vibrant red. A total of 3,223 images were catalogued using drone photogrammetry and traditional photography. The images were categorised by their form, with figurative images being the most commonly occurring, contributing 58% of the total. More than half of these related to animals. At least 22 different animals were identified, including deer, birds, peccary, lizards, turtles, and tapir. Although fish remains are abundant in the archaeological remains, their appearance in the art is limited to just two panels, in what appear to be fishing scenes. Notable by their absence were big cats, despite their position as apex predators and the evidence of artwork at other Colombian sites. The researchers speculate that the artists were potentially restricted from depicting powerful beasts, such as the jaguar. While images of figures combining human and animal characteristics reveal a complex mythology of transformation between animal and human states that is still present within modern Amazonian communities. The diverse array of animals represented in the art and the archaeological remains demonstrates a broad understanding and exploitation of a multitude of environments in the region, including savannah, flooded forests and rivers. "The Indigenous people of Cerro Azul and the surrounding lands hunted and depicted a diverse array of animals from different ecologies -- from aquatic fish to arboreal monkeys; terrestrial deer to aerial birds, both nocturnal and diurnal," says Dr Javier Aceituno, of Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín. "They had intimate knowledge of the various habitats in the region and possessed the relevant skills to track and hunt animals and harvest plants from each, as part of a broad subsistence strategy." "Our approach reveals differences between what indigenous communities exploited for food and what is conceptually important to represent -- and not represent -- in art," concludes Professor Jose Iriarte, also of Exeter. "Though we cannot be certain what meaning these images have, they certainly do offer greater nuance to our understanding of the power of myths in indigenous communities. They are particularly revealing when it comes to more cosmological aspects of Amazonian life, such as what is considered taboo, where power resides, and how negotiations with the supernatural were conducted."

Mining activity coincides with the world's most valuable biodiversity hotspots, which contain a hyper-diversity of species and unique habitats found nowhere else on Earth. The biggest risk to species comes from mining for materials fundamental to our transition to clean energy, such as lithium and cobalt -- both essential components of solar panels, wind turbines and electric cars. Quarrying for limestone, which is required in huge amounts for cement as a construction material, is also putting many species at risk. The threat to nature is not limited to the physical locations of the mines -- species living at great distances away can also be impacted, for example by polluted watercourses, or deforestation for new access roads and infrastructure. The researchers say governments and the mining industry should focus on reducing the pollution driven by mining as an 'easy win' to reduce the biodiversity loss associated with mineral extraction. This is the most complete global assessment of the threat to biodiversity from mineral extraction ever undertaken.The results are published today in the journal Current Biology . "We simply won't be able to deliver the clean energy we need to reduce our climate impact without mining for the materials we need, and that creates a problem because we're mining in locations that often have very high levels of biodiversity," said Professor David Edwards in the University of Cambridge's Department of Plant Sciences and Conservation Research Institute, senior author of the report. He added: "So many species, particularly fish, are being put at risk through the pollution caused by mining. It would be an easy win to work on reducing this freshwater pollution so we can still get the products we need for the clean energy transition, but in a way that isn't causing so much biodiversity loss." Across all vertebrate species, fish are at particularly high risk from mining (2,053 species), followed by reptiles, amphibians, birds and mammals. The level of threat seems to be linked to where a particular species lives and its lifestyle: species using freshwater habitats, and species with small ranges are particularly at risk. "The need for limestone as a core component of construction activity also poses a real risk to wildlife. Lots of species are very restricted in where they live because they're specialised to live on limestone. A cement mine can literally take out an entire hillside -- and with it these species' homes," said Ieuan Lamb in the University of Sheffield's School of Biosciences, first author of the report. The Bent-Toed Gecko, for example, is threatened by limestone quarrying in Malaysia -- it only exists on a single mountain range that planned mining activity will completely destroy. To get their results, the researchers used International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) data to see which vertebrate species are threatened by mining. By mapping the locations of these species they could investigate the types of mining that are putting species at risk, and see where the risks are particularly high. The researchers discovered that species categorised as 'vulnerable, endangered, or critically endangered' are more threatened by mineral extraction than species of lesser concern. Watercourses can be affected in many ways, and water pollution can affect hundreds of thousands of square kilometres of rivers and flood plains. Mining sand as a construction material, for example, alters patterns of water flow in rivers and wetlands, making birds like the Indian Skimmer more accessible to predators. Mineral extraction threatens vertebrate species populations across the tropics, with hotspots in the Andes, coastal West and Central Africa, and South-East Asia -- which coincide with high mine density. For example, artisanal small-scale alluvial gold mining in Ghana threatens important bird areas through environmental mercury pollution. Global demand for metal minerals, fossil fuels and construction materials is growing dramatically, and the extraction industry is expanding rapidly to meet this demand. In 2022 the revenue of the industry as a whole was estimated at US $943 billion. Biodiversity underpins the protection of the world's carbon stocks, which help to mitigate climate change. The study focused only on vertebrate species, but the researchers say mining is also likely to be a substantial risk to plants and invertebrates. "There's no question that we are going to continue to mine -- our entire societies are based on mined products. But there are environmental tensions embodied in our use of these products. Our report is a vital first step in avoiding biodiversity loss amidst the predicted drastic expansion of the mining industry," said Edwards. "Wildlife is more sensitive to mining in some regions of the world than in others, and our report can inform choices of where to prioritise getting our minerals to cause the least damage to biodiversity. Future policy should also focus on creating more circular economies -- increasing recycling and reuse of materials, rather than just extracting more," said Lamb.

Researchers have long known that mangroves are superstars of carbon absorption and storage. But until now, limited information existed on how long it took for carbon stored in planted mangroves to reach levels found in intact mangroves. "About ten years ago, Sahadev Sharma, then with the Institute of Pacific Islands Forestry, and I discovered that 20-year-old mangrove plantations in Cambodia had carbon stocks comparable to those of intact forests," Rich MacKenzie, also with the Institute of Pacific Islands Forestry,stated. MacKenzie and Sharma assembled a team of mangrove researchers that came together from across the globe to lend their expertise. Led by Carine Bourgeois from the Forest Service's International Programs office, the team used logistic models compiled from 40 years of data and built from almost 700 planted mangrove stands worldwide to measure carbon stock. They discovered, after 20 years, the trees' carbon stock reached 71-73% of that found in intact stands. These research findings could have a positive impact on efforts to restore mangroves worldwide. Along with historical losses, human-driven land use change, extreme weather events, and erosion have wiped out 35 % of the global mangrove area over the past five decades. "As our dataset grows and more data become available, we hope researchers and stakeholders will gain new insight into planning and techniques for restoring mangroves," Sharma stated. Part of that research work also involves monitoring mangroves to see how they're faring. "Periodic and regular monitoring of mangroves can provide useful data on survival and success of restoration efforts and can help devise adaptive management strategies as and when needed," Rupesh Bhomia, from the Center for International Forestry Research and World Agroforestry (CIFOR-ICRAF), stated. Globally, there's more recognition that conserving and restoring mangroves is vital. These trees are not only powerhouses of carbon storage, but coastal guardians that act as barriers during tsunamis and storm surges. Mangroves also provide habitat for diverse species and nurseries for many aquatic animals. But MacKenzie warns that mangrove plantations are not always a solution for restoring the trees. "Properly planned and implemented mangrove plantations are more effective at restoring carbon stocks than are degraded stands. However, this does not mean that mangrove plantations are always the best restoration method," MacKenzie stated. Planting mangroves is not a replacement, nor does it compensate for conserving intact stands, the researchers emphasized. "Our models indicate that replanting in all highly restorable mangrove areas would absorb less than one percent of annual global emissions over 20 years. That's why conserving existing mangrove stands is paramount," Bourgeois emphasized.

The new dinosaur, Fona [/Foat'NAH/] herzogae lived 99 million years ago in what is now Utah. At that time, the area was a large floodplain ecosystem sandwiched between the shores of a massive inland ocean to the east and active volcanoes and mountains to the west. It was a warm, wet, muddy environment with numerous rivers running through it. Paleontologists from North Carolina State University and the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences unearthed the fossil -- and other specimens from the same species -- in the Mussentuchit Member of the Cedar Mountain Formation, beginning in 2013. The preservation of these fossils, along with some distinguishing features, alerted them to the possibility of burrowing. Fona was a small-bodied, plant-eating dinosaur about the size of a large dog with a simple body plan. It lacks the bells and whistles that characterize its highly ornamented relatives such as horned dinosaurs, armored dinosaurs, and crested dinosaurs. But that doesn't mean Fona was boring. Fona shares several anatomical features with animals known for digging or burrowing, such as large bicep muscles, strong muscle attachment points on the hips and legs, fused bones along the pelvis -- likely to help with stability while digging -- and hindlimbs that are proportionally larger than the forelimbs. But that isn't the only evidence that this animal spent time underground. "The bias in the fossil record is toward bigger animals, primarily because in floodplain environments like the Mussentuchit, small bones on the surface will often scatter, rot away, or become scavenged before burial and fossilization," says Haviv Avrahami, Ph.D. student at NC State and digital technician for the new Dueling Dinosaurs program at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences. Avrahami is first author of the paper describing the work. "But Fona is often found complete, with many of its bones preserved in the original death pose, chest down with splayed forelimbs, and in exceptionally good condition," Avrahami says. "If it had already been underground in a burrow before death, it would have made this type of preservation more likely." Lindsay Zanno, associate research professor at NC State, head of paleontology at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences and corresponding author of the work, agrees. " Fona skeletons are way more common in this area than we would predict for a small animal with fragile bones," Zanno says. "The best explanation for why we find so many of them, and recover them in small bundles of multiple individuals, is that they were living at least part of the time underground. Essentially, Fona did the hard work for us, by burying itself all over this area." Although the researchers have yet to identify the subterranean burrows of Fona , the tunnels and chamber of its closest relative, Oryctodromeus , have been found in Idaho and Montana. These finds support the idea that Fona also used burrows. The genus name Fona comes from the ancestral creation story of the Chamorro people, who are the indigenous populations of Guam and the Pacific Mariana Islands. Fo'na and Pontan were brother and sister explorers who discovered the island and became the land and sky. The species name honors Lisa Herzog, the paleontology operations manager at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences, for her invaluable contributions and dedication to the field of paleontology. "I wanted to honor the indigenous mythology of Guam, which is where my Chamorro ancestors are from," Avrahami says. "In the myth, Fo'na became part of the land when she died, and from her body sprung forth new life, which to me, ties into fossilization, beauty, and creation. Fona was most likely covered in a downy coat of colorful feathers. The species name is for Lisa Herzog, who has been integral to all this work and discovered one of the most exceptional Fona specimens of several individuals preserved together in what was likely a burrow." Fona is also a distant relative of another famous North Carolina fossil: Willo, a Thescelosaurus neglectus specimen currently housed at the museum and also thought to have adaptations for a semifossorial -- or partially underground -- lifestyle, research that was published late in 2023 by Zanno and former NC State postdoctoral researcher David Button. "T . neglectus was at the tail end of this lineage -- Fona is its ancestor from about 35 million years prior," Avrahami says. The researchers believe Fona is key to expanding our understanding of Cretaceous ecosystems. " Fona gives us insight into the third dimension an animal can occupy by moving underground," says Avrahami. "It adds to the richness of the fossil record and expands the known diversity of small-bodied herbivores, which remain poorly understood despite being incredibly integral components of Cretaceous ecosystems." "People tend to have a myopic view of dinosaurs that hasn't kept up with the science," Zanno says. "We now know that dinosaur diversity ran the gamut from tiny arboreal gliders and nocturnal hunters, to sloth-like grazers, and yes, even subterranean shelterers." The work appears in The Anatomical Record. Peter Makovicky of the University of Minnesota and Ryan Tucker of Stellenbosch University also contributed to the work.

The Key Largo tree cactus ( Pilosocereus millspaughii ) still grows on a few scattered islands in the Caribbean, including northern Cuba and parts of the Bahamas. In the United States, it was restricted to a single population in the Florida Keys, first discovered in 1992 and monitored intermittently since. Salt water intrusion from rising seas, soil depletion from hurricanes and high tides, and herbivory by mammals had put significant pressure on the population. By 2021, what had been a thriving stand of about 150 stems was reduced to six ailing fragments, which researchers salvaged for off-site cultivation to ensure their survival. "Unfortunately, the Key Largo tree cactus may be a bellwether for how other low-lying coastal plants will respond to climate change," said Jennifer Possley, director of regional conservation at Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden and lead author on a study published Tuesday, July 9 that documents the population's decline. Two closely related cacti negatively affected by environmental change Comparatively little is known about Florida's rare cacti. Researchers initially stumbled upon the Key Largo tree cactus in an isolated mangrove forest, and for several years afterward, its identity remained uncertain. Most considered it to be a unique population of the similarly named Key tree cactus ( Pilosocereus robinii ), a federally endangered species that is present elsewhere in the Florida Keys. The two cacti have a similar appearance. The stems of both shoot up perpendicular to the ground and can grow to be more than 20 feet tall. Both have cream-colored flowers that smell like garlic and reflect moonlight, attracting bat pollinators, while their bright red and purple fruit catch the eye of birds and mammals. But there are key differences as well, which made Alan Franck, currently the herbarium collection manager at the Florida Museum of Natural History, suspect they were dealing with something unique on Key Largo. "The most striking difference is the tuft of long, woolly hairs at the base of the flowers and fruits," Franck said. The hair is so thick, it can look as though the cactus is covered in drifts of snow. Spines of the Key Largo cactus are also twice as long as they are on the Key tree cactus. In 2019, Franck confirmed that the Key Largo population was the first and only known instance of Pilosocereus millspaughii in the U.S. By then, it was succumbing to some of the same environmental pressures that had plagued its relative, the Key tree cactus, over the last century. The latter was once common throughout the Florida Keys, but its numbers dipped dangerously low as more people moved to the area. Writing in 1917, botanist John Small noted that the Key tree cactus "was for a long time very abundant [on Key West]…In recent years, with the destruction of the hammock for securing firewood and for developing building sites, this interesting cactus has become scarce, until at present it is on the verge of extermination in its natural habitat." The Key tree cactus was listed as federally endangered in 1984, but its numbers continued to wane. Between 1994 and 2007, it decreased by 84%. Researchers at Fairchild began monitoring all of the tree cactus populations annually in 2007, working in tandem with local land managers. One Fairchild-led study showed that salt levels were higher in soil beneath dead vs. living cacti in the years following a storm surge event in the Lower Keys, drawing a clear connection between mortality and increased salinity. Researchers also initiated a robust conservation collection for these species. Potted cacti are grown at a facility in Coral Gables, Florida, and seeds from both wild and cultivated plants are carefully banked for long-term conservation. Researchers study and rescue the remnants of a dwindling stock The Key Largo tree cactus grew on a low limestone outcrop surrounded by mangroves near the shore. The site originally had a distinct layer of soil and organic matter that allowed the cactus and other plants to grow, but storm surge from hurricanes and exceptionally high tides eroded away this material until there wasn't much left. Salt-tolerant plants that had been previously restricted to brackish soils beneath the mangroves slowly began creeping up the outcrop, an indication that salt levels were increasing. Given enough time, these changing conditions would likely have killed the cactus. But other incidents occurred that hastened the pace. "We noticed the first big problem in 2015," said study co-author James Lange, a research botanist at Fairchild. When he and his colleagues arrived to evaluate the plants that year, half of the cacti had died, apparently as a result of an alarming amount of herbivory. Cacti store reserves of water in their succulent stems, which allows them to survive for long periods of time without rain. This makes them enticing to animals when other sources of water are scarce. "In 2011, we started seeing saltwater flooding from king tides in the area," Lange said, referring to particularly high ocean tides. "That limits the amount of freshwater available to small mammals and might be related to why the herbivores targeted this cactus, but we can't say for sure. We'd never seen cactus herbivory like this anywhere in the Lower Keys, where flooding has tended to be less extensive." The team set out cameras in hopes of finding the culprit, but whatever it was did not return, and there was no evidence of significant herbivory thereafter. Yet, when the team came back the following year, roughly another 50% of the population had died. In response, staff from Fairchild and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection took a few cuttings of what remained to grow in greenhouses. In 2017, category 5 Hurricane Irma swept across South Florida, creating a 5-foot storm surge. The highest point on Key Largo is only 15 feet above sea level, and large portions of the island remained flooded for days afterward. Once the storm had passed, the Fairchild team conducted triage with several cactus populations throughout the Keys, removing branches that had fallen on cacti and salvaging other ill-fated material. Conditions were so extreme that biologists had to put out kiddie pools of freshwater to keep local wildlife alive. Exacerbating the already degrading Key Largo tree cactus habitat, king tides in 2019 left large portions of the island, including the extremely low-lying outcrop, flooded for over three months. By 2021, there were only six Key Largo tree cactus stems left. As it was clear the population wasn't going to survive, the team allowed the plants to flower and fruit for the remainder of the year, then salvaged all remaining green material and replanted it in greenhouses or controlled settings outdoors. At present, researchers know of no naturally growing Key Largo cacti in the United States. "We have tentative plans with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection to replant some in the wild," Possley said. Similar efforts are responsible, in large part, for the continued existence of the related Key tree cactus in Florida. "The amount of reintroduced material of this species is already more than the amount of wild material that's left," Possley said. But, she added, this may end up being more of a stopgap than a solution. Environments suitable for tree cacti are disappearing along with the plants they support. "It's generally a fringe between the mangroves and upland hammocks called thorn scrub, and there just aren't many places like that left where we can put reintroduced populations." The decline of the Key Largo tree cactus and the necessity of its removal has given researchers an idea of what to expect in the future as species contend with a rapidly warming world. Instead of a smooth, predictable rise in sea or salt levels, the reality of climate change is messier and manifests itself in a complex series of related events that put additional pressure on species that are already stressed. "We are on the front lines of biodiversity loss," said study co-author George Gann, executive director for the Institute for Regional Conservation. "Our research in South Florida over the past 25 years shows that more than one-in-four native plant species are critically threatened with regional extinction or are already extirpated due to habitat loss, over collecting, invasive species and other drivers of degradation. More than 50 are already gone, including four global extinctions."

Satellite measurements For his research, Grandjean linked decades of satellite measurements of tidal areas around the world with data on the turbidity of the water, which is also measured by satellites. Importantly, Grandjean has established a lower limit for the necessary turbidity of the water in deltas worldwide. A very clear relationship emerged in the long term: intertidal areas only grow when the water is turbid enough. "After all, turbid water means more sand and silt particles in the water, which can allow the coast to grow," the researcher explains. Vulnerable tidal flats due to human interventions Worldwide, the turbidity of many coastal waters has been declining for decades, making the tidal flats sensitive to loss. Additionally, sea level rise requires that water has higher turbidity to continue to maintain tidal flats. The relatively low turbidity globally threatens essential areas for biodiversity and coastal safety. After all, tidal flats are important foraging areas for birds and contribute to wave attenuation. Coastal defenses must improve Globally, the determination of the necessary turbidity for the preservation of tidal flats by Grandjean provides an essential basis for rethinking human interventions in deltas. We need to think more carefully about the ways in which human activities affect the coast, on which we rely for our safety. These challenges are not unique to any one region but are evident globally due to extensive human modifications to natural water systems. For instance, the construction of large dams, such as the Three Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River, has significantly reduced the sediment supply downstream. This reduction is crucial for the propagation of tidal flats, leading to sediment starvation that hinders the natural rebuilding of intertidal zones, vital for coastal protection and biodiversity. Similarly, in the Netherlands, the construction of the storm surge barrier in the Oosterschelde in the 1980s has led to severe 'sand starvation'. Because of this barrier, less sand can flow from the North Sea into the estuary, resulting in clearer water that fails to replenish the intertidal areas, thus causing them to erode. "In the long run, this is not sustainable," Grandjean believes. "When too much intertidal area disappears outside the dikes of Zeeland, the safety of the complete coast is at stake. So not only for nature, but also for safety, we must begin to protect the areas outside the dikes much more effectively. The water has to become murkier, so we may have to consider dismantling the Oosterschelde storm surge barrier in the future. A careful balance between nature conservation and coastal protection is essential, ensuring that both goals strengthen rather than counteract each other." Detailed measurements provide insight Tim Grandjean defended his PhD on this topic on April 24th and has also collected new data on the dynamics of intertidal areas. These data provide insight into the short-term vulnerability. He used a technique that was developed in NIOZ workshops. "The dynamics of intertidal areas can be measured with very expensive sensors or with labour-intensive, manual measurements. However, this way, we could never collect data in many different places at the same time. The technicians at NIOZ developed sensors that were cheap enough to record the height of the bottom to the millimetre, several times a day, at different locations along the Western and Eastern Scheldt for several years now." Heavy dynamics Those precise measurements show that at high tide, an intertidal zone can easily vary one or two centimeters in height within a single day. "For you or me, a centimeter more or less under our boots may not matter, but if you are a worm or a mussel, or a seed of eelgrass, that is indeed too much dynamics," Grandjean says. Measures that can work Grandjean also looked at the grounds between groynes constructed by the province of Zeeland, to improve the quality of tidal nature along part of the banks of the Westerschelde. "Of course, we already knew that these groynes, along rivers and coasts, can protect, but our measurements show that benthic life along the Westerschelde also benefits from these measures. The dynamics decrease enough in time and space for benthic animals to settle better." Additionally, the reduction in flow between the groynes could potentially benefit the stability of the intertidal coastal areas in the long term and mitigate the effects of rising sea levels. However, further research is essential for understanding this dynamic and its long-term effects. To preserve the important intertidal areas and salt marshes off our coasts for the future, we need more turbid water. That is one of the striking conclusions from a new study conducted by a Dutch-Chinese team of researchers and published today in Nature Geoscience ."These natural areas outside our dikes are essential for nature and coastal defense. But because how we are now building in the Delta and the hinterland, coastal defense is endangered in the long term," warns NIOZ researcher Tim Grandjean. Satellite measurements For his research, Grandjean linked decades of satellite measurements of tidal areas around the world with data on the turbidity of the water, which is also measured by satellites. Importantly, Grandjean has established a lower limit for the necessary turbidity of the water in deltas worldwide. A very clear relationship emerged in the long term: intertidal areas only grow when the water is turbid enough. "After all, turbid water means more sand and silt particles in the water, which can allow the coast to grow," the researcher explains. Vulnerable tidal flats due to human interventions Worldwide, the turbidity of many coastal waters has been declining for decades, making the tidal flats sensitive to loss. Additionally, sea level rise requires that water has higher turbidity to continue to maintain tidal flats. The relatively low turbidity globally threatens essential areas for biodiversity and coastal safety. After all, tidal flats are important foraging areas for birds and contribute to wave attenuation. Coastal defenses must improve Globally, the determination of the necessary turbidity for the preservation of tidal flats by Grandjean provides an essential basis for rethinking human interventions in deltas. We need to think more carefully about the ways in which human activities affect the coast, on which we rely for our safety. These challenges are not unique to any one region but are evident globally due to extensive human modifications to natural water systems. For instance, the construction of large dams, such as the Three Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River, has significantly reduced the sediment supply downstream. This reduction is crucial for the propagation of tidal flats, leading to sediment starvation that hinders the natural rebuilding of intertidal zones, vital for coastal protection and biodiversity. Similarly, in the Netherlands, the construction of the storm surge barrier in the Oosterschelde in the 1980s has led to severe 'sand starvation'. Because of this barrier, less sand can flow from the North Sea into the estuary, resulting in clearer water that fails to replenish the intertidal areas, thus causing them to erode. "In the long run, this is not sustainable," Grandjean believes. "When too much intertidal area disappears outside the dikes of Zeeland, the safety of the complete coast is at stake. So not only for nature, but also for safety, we must begin to protect the areas outside the dikes much more effectively. The water has to become murkier, so we may have to consider dismantling the Oosterschelde storm surge barrier in the future. A careful balance between nature conservation and coastal protection is essential, ensuring that both goals strengthen rather than counteract each other." Detailed measurements provide insight Tim Grandjean defended his PhD on this topic on April 24th and has also collected new data on the dynamics of intertidal areas. These data provide insight into the short-term vulnerability. He used a technique that was developed in NIOZ workshops. "The dynamics of intertidal areas can be measured with very expensive sensors or with labour-intensive, manual measurements. However, this way, we could never collect data in many different places at the same time. The technicians at NIOZ developed sensors that were cheap enough to record the height of the bottom to the millimetre, several times a day, at different locations along the Western and Eastern Scheldt for several years now." Heavy dynamics Those precise measurements show that at high tide, an intertidal zone can easily vary one or two centimeters in height within a single day. "For you or me, a centimeter more or less under our boots may not matter, but if you are a worm or a mussel, or a seed of eelgrass, that is indeed too much dynamics," Grandjean says. Measures that can work Grandjean also looked at the grounds between groynes constructed by the province of Zeeland, to improve the quality of tidal nature along part of the banks of the Westerschelde. "Of course, we already knew that these groynes, along rivers and coasts, can protect, but our measurements show that benthic life along the Westerschelde also benefits from these measures. The dynamics decrease enough in time and space for benthic animals to settle better." Additionally, the reduction in flow between the groynes could potentially benefit the stability of the intertidal coastal areas in the long term and mitigate the effects of rising sea levels. However, further research is essential for understanding this dynamic and its long-term effects.

The paper is the first clear evidence demonstrating an effect of climate change on this charismatic species. Specifically, the paper shows that July rainfall results in reduced July water clarity in loon territories. Reduced water clarity, in turn, makes it difficult for adult loons to find and capture their prey (mainly small fishes) under water, so they are not able to meet their chicks' metabolic needs. The result is low chick weight and higher chick mortality. Since loons use the same foraging mode across their breeding range, the impact of water clarity on loon breeding success found in Wisconsin is likely to be echoed from Alaska to Iceland. Piper, in collaboration with Max Gline and Kevin Rose from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, reports several important findings. Over the past 25 years, there has been a consistent decline in water clarity. During the same period, body weights of adult males, adult females, and chicks have also declined. By searching among a large number of environmental variables, the authors were able to pinpoint mean water clarity during the month of July -- the month of most rapid growth in chicks -- as the strongest predictor of body weight. In a separate analysis, the authors found that rainfall in July impacts water clarity negatively. That is, heavy rainfall in July results in reduced water clarity, whereas light rainfall leads to high clarity and good foraging conditions for loons. Consequently, the rise in rainfall observed in recent decades, attributed to climate change, poses challenges for adult loons in feeding their offspring and diminishes chick survival rates. The precise way in which rainfall leads to reduced water clarity is currently under investigation. The authors suggest that rain might carry dissolved organic matter (DOM) into lakes from adjacent streams and shoreline areas. But it is also possible that nutrients (such as fertilizers used on lawns by lake residents), pet waste, or even leaks from septic systems might be to blame. This study represents a unique partnership between diverse fields. Piper's three-decade-long study of loon behavioral ecology in northern Wisconsin intersects with Gline and Rose's use of Landsat imagery to calculate freshwater lake clarity. Combining data from these sources has illuminated the cause behind the sharp decline in breeding success in northern Wisconsin. It is now evident that both the loss of water clarity -- as well as increasing populations of black flies, which have increased due to greater rainfall -- are to blame for the population downturn. "Few animals on Earth are at once so beloved and so poorly understood as Common Loons," Piper said. "This partnership between a loon behaviorist and lake ecologists who collect satellite data on water clarity has given us a unique and powerful window onto foraging efficiency and the loon population as a whole that might help us conserve the species." Piper is in the process of establishing a second marked study population of loons, equal in size to the first, in Minnesota. There he will determine whether the recent decline in loon breeding success recorded by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources results from a loss of water clarity, as in Wisconsin.

River dolphins are among the rarest modern cetaceans, with most extant species critically endangered. Despite their similar appearance, however, these animals are not directly related, but represent the late survivors of different cetacean groups that once inhabited our planet. An international research team led by the University of Zurich (UZH) has now revealed the largest river dolphin ever found, measuring between 3 and 3.5 meters. The new species, named Pebanista yacuruna after a mythical aquatic people believed to inhabit the Amazon basin, was found in Peruvian Amazonia and is dated to be 16 million years old. Changing landscape drove giant dolphin to extinction The new dolphin species belongs to the Platanistoidea, a group of dolphins that were common in the world's oceans between 24 and 16 million years ago. The researchers believe that their originally marine ancestors invaded the prey-rich freshwater ecosystems of proto-Amazonia and adapted to this new environment. "Sixteen million years ago, the Peruvian Amazonia looked very different from what it is today," says lead author Aldo Benites-Palomino from the Department of Paleontology at UZH. "Much of the Amazonian plain was covered by a large system of lakes and swamps called Pebas." This landscape included aquatic, semi-aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems (swamps, floodplains, etc.) and stretched across what is today Colombia, Ecuador, Bolivia, Peru and Brazil. When the Pebas system began to give way to modern Amazonia about 10 million years ago, new habitats caused Pebanista's prey to disappear, driving the giant dolphin to extinction. This opened an ecological niche that was exploited by relatives of today's Amazon river dolphins ( Inia ), which were also facing extinction in the oceans due to the rise of new cetaceans, such as modern oceanic dolphins. Findings shed light on the evolutionary history of freshwater dolphins "We discovered that its size is not the only remarkable aspect," says Aldo Benites-Palomino. "With this fossil record unearthed in the Amazon, we expected to find close relatives of the living Amazon River dolphin -- but instead the closest cousins of Pebanista are the South Asian river dolphins (genus Platanista )." Pebanista and Platanista both share highly developed facial crests, which are specialized bony structures associated with echolocation -- the ability to "see" by emitting high-frequency sounds and listening or their echoes, which they rely on heavily for hunting. "For river dolphins, echolocation, or biosonar, is even more critical as the waters they inhabit are extremely muddy, which impedes their vision," explains Gabriel Aguirre-Fernández, a UZH researcher who also participated in this study. The elongated snout with many teeth suggests that Pebanista fed on fish, as other species of river dolphins do today. "After two decades of work in South America we had found several giant forms from the region, but this is the first dolphin of its kind," adds Marcelo R. Sánchez-Villagra, director of the Department of Paleontology at UZH. "We were especially intrigued by its peculiar biogeographical deep-time history." Finding Fossils in the Amazon The Amazon rainforest is one of the harshest regions for paleontological fieldwork. Fossils are only accessible during the dry season, when river levels are low enough to expose the ancient fossil-bearing rocks. If these fossils are not collected in time, the rising water levels during the rainy season will sweep them away and they will be lost forever. The holotype -- a single physical specimen on which the description and name of a new species is based -- of Pebanista was found in 2018, when the lead author of the study was still an undergraduate student. The expedition, led by Peruvian paleontologist Rodolfo Salas-Gismondi, former postdoctoral fellow at the Department of Paleontology at UZH, traversed more than 300 kilometers of the Napo River. Dozens of fossils were discovered and collected, but the biggest surprise waited at the end of the expedition, after almost three weeks of exploration: the discovery of the large dolphin skull, catalogued as MUSM 4017, which has been permanently deposited in the Museo de Historia Natural in Lima.

Inflatable couch For her experiments, Rios-Yunes spent many hours on an inflatable couch on the dry bottom of the Wester- and the Oosterschelde. "I mimicked a storm on the mud, using a bucket without a bottom and a big blender, stirring up the mud and measuring the release or the uptake of nitrogen and phosphorus. But, since I needed to do this for six hours in a row, I rapidly found out that I needed a little bit of comfort, sitting on the mud. The inflatable couch was my life saver during the field work," she jokingly says. More N, less P Rios-Yunes found out that considerable amounts of nitrogen are released when her experimental storm stirs the bottom. "In just a couple of hours, the amount of nitrogen that is normally released in weeks, may come out of the mud during one storm. This means that much more nutrients become available in the water column, and these could be used algae to grow." Phosphorus, on the other hand, was taken up during the 'storm' in the Oosterschelde but released in the Westerschelde. "This may be because of the differences in chemical composition of the mud between an estuary and a tidal bay." Ecosystem services Storage of nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus, but also of many trace elements, are considered a crucial ecosystem service of places like the Wester- and the Oosterschelde. This ecosystem service is under increasing pressure, Rios-Yunes explains. For example, the Oosterschelde coast is relatively important for storage of nutrients, compared to the subtidal sea bottom. But due to the Oosterschelde storm surge barrier and also with rising sea levels in the future, the coast of the Oosterschelde is 'eaten by the currents'. "Therefore, relatively large amounts of nutrients may become available for algae and other organisms." Equilibria Temperature and salinity, as well as benthic animals also influence the chemistry of the tidal sea floor. "But these phenomena have not been studied a lot, so far," Rios-Yunes says. "For fundamental research into the dynamics of nutrients and other equilibria in tidal areas, it is very important to understand the role of temperature, salinity, benthic animals and also turmoil by storms." Coastal squeeze Polici makers and keepers of natural areas like the Oosterschelde should also understand the dynamics of nutrients in a changing world, Rios-Yunes says. "My research stresses the importance to keep the coast of these tidal areas in a good condition, and thus avoid losing the valuable ecosystem services they provide."

On September 24, 2023, the BioRescue scientists and veterinarians, led by the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research (Leibniz-IZW), transferred two southern white rhino embryos into Curra, a southern white rhinoceros, selected as a surrogate mother at the Ol Pejeta Conservancy in Kenya. The oocytes used in producing the embryos were retrieved from Elenore, a southern white rhinoceros living in the Pairi Daiza Zoo in Belgium. The sperm used for fertilisation originated from the male Athos from the Zoo Salzburg in Hellbrunn, Austria. The oocytes from Elenore were fertilised in vitro by intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) and developed into blastoscysts at Avantea's laboratories in Cremona, Italy. For the embryo transfer in Kenya, the BioRescue scientists transferred two embryos to increase the chance of a successful outcome. So far, the BioRescue team has performed 13 embryo transfers in rhinoceroses, three in Kenya and ten in Europe. Previously, an embryo transfer, which is a widely used technique in domestic species, has never been attempted in rhinos. BioRescue scientists developed the necessary techniques, by building on decades of their own research. Currently, there are only two northern white rhinos left in the world: The female Najin and her daughter Fatu. Additionally, living cells from 12 different northern white rhino individuals are stored in liquid nitrogen. The last two females currently live in Kenya, at Ol Pejeta Conservancy, where they are guarded and cared for day and night. Since 2019, the BioRescue conservation science programme produced and cryopreserved 30 northern white rhino embryos. These are currently stored in liquid nitrogen at minus 196 degrees Celsius in Berlin, Germany, and Cremona, Italy, awaiting embryo transfer into southern white rhino surrogate mothers. The successful transfer of a southern white rhino embryo is a proof of concept that allows to take this crucial step -- an embryo transfer with a northern white rhino embryo -- for the first time. The embryo transfer in this subspecies is entirely new ground as a veterinary and scientific procedure, and all protocols, methods and pieces of equipment had to be newly developed from scratch. As it is the established routine with all BioRescue procedures, the embryo transfers are accompanied by an ethical assessment conducted by Padua University. This was also the case in September, when all participants of the embryo transfer filled out a questionnaire that proposed any possible scenarios during the procedure, and attendant risks to animals and participants. The vasectomised, sterile teaser bull Ouwan mated with Curra on September 17 and 18, signalling the ideal timing for the embryo transfer, which took place on September 24. After the procedure until November 2023, Curra was monitored on a daily basis in the enclosure at the Ol Pejeta Conservancy. During this period, Ouwan showed no further interest in Curra, a first sign of a successful embryo transfer resulting in pregnancy. The BioRescue team was scheduled for November 28 to perform a pregnancy check in Curra, but the teaser bull Ouwan was found dead on November 22 and Curra was found dead on November 25. Apparently, extremely heavy rains led to a flooding of the surrogate enclosure and set free dormant clostridianbacteria spores. The dissection of the animals revealed a severe systemic infection by a clostridian bacterial strain and resultant intoxication by the bacterial toxin. It also revealed that Curra was pregnant with a 70 days old male fetus that was 6.4 cm long. Tissue samples of the fetus were collected and transported to the Max Delbrück Centre for Molecular Medicine and the Leibniz-IZW in Berlin, Germany. In January 2024, it was confirmed through the analysis of the fetus DNA that the pregnancy resulted from the embryo transfer. When the BioRescue team arrived in Kenya on November 28, the preliminary results indicated an intoxication with the clostridian bacterial strains Paraclostridium bifermentans and Paenicolostridium sordellii . Immediately after the incident, the BioRescue team, including Kenya Wildlife Service, Wildlife Training Research Institute, Ol Pejeta Conservancy and Safari Park Dvur Králové formed a crisis team on site and established fast and effective measures to protect all current semi-captive rhinos including the last two northern white rhinos Najin and Fatu. The measures included a vaccination programme, quarantine of affected areas and fencing of new emergency enclosures. The next steps in the BioRescue research programme included the selection and preparation of a new teaser bull. The bull will allow the scientists to know when a possible surrogate female is ready to receive an embryo implantation. The team also has to select the next surrogate mothers. After these steps, which will take several months, an embryo transfer with a northern white rhino embryo will be attempted. The BioRescue research programme is supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) over a time-period of six years with up to around 6 million Euros. Thomas Hildebrandt, BioRescue project head, Leibniz-IZW said, "The embryo transfer technique is well established for humans and for domesticated animals such as horses or cows. But for rhinos, it has been completely uncharted territory and anything from the approach over procedure protocols to required equipment had to be invented, developed, tried and tested to be safe for use. Together with the team and many professional partners, I developed the devices that can actually find and access the required location where to insert the tiny embryo into a 2-ton animal. It took many years to get it right and we are overwhelmed that we now have proof that this technique works perfectly. It is bitter that this milestone is confirmed under such tragic circumstances with the death of the surrogate Curra and her unborn calf, but I am certain that this proof of concept is a turn of the tide for the survival of the northern white rhino and the health of Central-African ecosystems. It comes just in time to achieve a pregnancy for northern white rhinos: we want the offspring to live together with Najin and Fatu for years to learn the social behaviour of its kind. Although embryos can be stored in liquid nitrogen for a very long time, we are in a rush to bring a northern white rhino baby to the ground -- with this proof of concept it can become a reality in two to three years. BioRescue is only so successful because we were capable to form such a great team called the BioRescue Consortium. Most likely this is one of the significant differences to other challenging conservation approaches."

"Biodiversity, climate, and sustainable development cannot be considered in isolation," said lead author Rachel Neugarten at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology. "We must also factor in nature's contributions to human well-being, including clean water, carbon storage, crop pollination, flood mitigation, coastal protection, and more." "We face enormous challenges. With limited resources available to address climate change, biodiversity loss, poverty and water insecurity, we must be strategic and find ways to tackle more than one challenge at a time," said senior author Amanda Rodewald, Garvin Professor and Senior Director of the Center for Avian Population Studies at the Cornell Lab. Study authors found that roughly half (44-49%) of global land area, excluding Antarctica, provides nearly all (90%) current levels of nature's services to people while also conserving biodiversity for 27,000 species of birds, mammals, reptiles, and amphibians. But their findings also point to potential conflict because 37% of the land areas are highly suitable for development by agriculture, renewable energy, oil and gas, mining, or urban expansion. Such high development potential, coupled with the fact that few priority areas are currently protected, means that successful conservation will require creative solutions. Such solutions carefully accommodate human activities through sustainable use and multifunctional landscape planning, particularly in the growing areas of renewable energy and commercial agriculture. "If designed carefully, renewable energy development can be compatible with biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services to people," Neugarten said. "Examples of this include livestock grazing under wind farms or cultivating native pollinator gardens under solar panels. But there's a real risk that achieving renewable energy goals could conflict with nature conservation goals without careful planning." This study is based on a global-scale optimization of land uses to identify joint priorities for biodiversity and nature's contributions to people. "Focusing on regions of high conservation value that are also under high development pressure reveals some unlikely areas that don't always garner global conservation attention -- these include working landscapes in the southeastern United States, southern Brazil and Uruguay, southeastern Australia, and Eurasia," said Patrick Roehrdanz, Conservation International's director of climate change and biodiversity and a co-author on the study. "These maps can help decision-makers in government, conservation NGOs, as well as donors and funding agencies to identify nature's key benefits for people and species -- benefits that are key to our survival and wellbeing," said World Wildlife Fund Global Biodiversity Lead Scientist Becky Chaplin-Kramer. "Such spatial information is critical for implementation of conservation commitments made under the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework as well as climate mitigation and adaptation commitments made during the recent COP28 in Dubai."

A few years ago, biologist Tara Miller (GRS'22) -- then working with Defenders of Wildlife -- met Wendy Hall, cofounder of the Adirondack Wildlife Refuge in Wilmington, N.Y. Hall mentioned some weird occurrences she had noticed in her job over the last few years: black vultures in the Adirondacks, unusual since they are typically a southern species, and earlier "baby seasons" in many species, which researchers have linked to climate change. Miller was intrigued by the idea of using animals' presence in rehab centers to study the impact of people and climate change on North America's wildlife. Miller (who uses they/them pronouns) is the lead author of a first-of-its-kind study that compiled hundreds of thousands of records from 94 wildlife centers across the United States and Canada to investigate the threats facing more than a thousand wildlife species by region -- including which threats affect which animals and how effective wildlife rehab centers are at treating their patients. The Boston University-led team hopes their study, published in Biological Conservation , will help inspire safety interventions and inform the conversation about incorporating wildlife into disaster management plans. The report includes examples of bald eagles sickened by lead poisoning, sea turtles entangled in fishing gear, and big brown bats colliding with buildings. In other words, human activities often have a devastating impact on wildlife, Miller says. What's more, the researchers showed that more animals were admitted to wildlife rehab centers following some climate change-linked extreme weather events. "A lot of what we found in the research isn't going to shock anyone, but you want to be able to tell people, 'It's not just this one animal. This is happening across the country,'" Miller says. "I think that was what was so cool about the work we were able to do with this huge dataset: tie together what rehabbers across the country are seeing and validate it. We were able to find a lot of these trends for the big picture of how humans are impacting wildlife." The Major Threats to Wildlife Miller started in BU's Urban Biogeoscience and Environmental Health (BU URBAN) program in 2018. Funded by the National Science Foundation, BU URBAN trains PhD students in biogeoscience, environmental health, and statistics, giving them the foundation to enter careers in academia, government agencies, NGOs, and the private sector. The program requires internships, so in summer 2019, Miller began contacting wildlife centers, which varied in size from those rescuing a few hundred animals a year to groups helping tens of thousands. Miller asked what trends they noticed and what questions they would like answered through any report. "I had phone calls with rehabbers where they would have to jump off because they had a baby squirrel they had to go feed, or one time someone had a porcupine autopsy they had to get back to," Miller says. "People were so generous with their time and of their data, and so enthusiastic about this whole project." Until recently, most wildlife rehab records existed only in binders and file cabinets, which made them inaccessible to researchers. But slowly, over the last decade or so, centers have started to digitize their documents, thanks in part to software such as the Wildlife Center of Virginia's WILD-ONe patient database system for wildlife rehabilitators. WILD-ONe was formed, in part, to help identify wildlife diseases and pathogens -- such as West Nile virus or avian flu -- that might impact human and livestock health. The software was the biggest data source for Miller's paper; two of the paper's coauthors, Karra Pierce and Edward Clark, Jr., work at the Wildlife Center of Virginia. "This was a gigantic dataset, with more than 600,000 observations," says Richard Primack, a BU College of Arts & Sciences professor of biology, who was Miller's PhD advisor and a coauthor on the paper. Primack says he encourages all of his students to consider what questions they want their data to address. In Miller's case, the big question was, "What are the major threats to wildlife?" The data revealed that 40 percent of animals were sent to rehab centers because of injuries classified under the "human disturbances" category. These included vehicle accidents, building collisions, and fishing incidents. "Forty percent of the animals showing up to wildlife rehab centers, largely because of human activity that has negatively impacted them?" Miller asks incredulously. "We need to ask how we can change our policies and behaviors to impact animals less." Seasonally speaking, the researchers found vehicle collisions were highest from May to July and disproportionately affected reptiles. Pesticide poisonings increased in the spring, summer, and early fall, a time of more agricultural and construction activity. Lead poisonings (most common in animals like bald eagles) tended to be seen in the winter, after hunting season. Many hunters still use lead ammunition when deer hunting, which will then poison scavengers like bald eagles and vultures when they go in for a snack on a carcass. Through their discussions, many rehabbers told Miller they knew they weren't catching all cases of lead and pesticide poisoning since the testing is so expensive and they can't send every suspected case out. The researchers also found more animals arrived at rehab centers the week after extreme weather events than the week before -- following hurricanes and floods in southern Florida, for example. They have also seen more animals admitted after big storms in recent years, "possibly due to the increasing intensity and frequency of extreme weather events," the study says. "We are seeing the impacts of these climate change-driven extreme weather effects on animals," Miller says. "So, should we be thinking about that in terms of disaster and response plans? Do we need to boost state funding to centers to be able to care for animals after these big events?" About one-third of the animals brought into wildlife rehab centers are eventually released back into the wild, though this number varies significantly among species. "For example, pelicans are injured but then are often released [68 percent], whereas bald eagles have a very low chance of being released [20 percent]," Primack says. "This presents a very interesting question of why the threats to wildlife are so different between these two groups of large birds." Recommending New Policy, Based on the Data The team hopes their study can be used by wildlife rehab centers when they apply for grants and funding, and can convince communities to make some fairly easy changes to protect animals. Wildlife underpasses and overpasses across roads can help deer and turtles cross a highway safely (also reducing car accidents), adding decals and other patterns to windows can save birds, and educating the public on how to phase out lead fishing gear and hunting ammunition can cut down on poisoning in scavengers. Some states also have lead ammunition buy-back programs, Miller says. These changes will help humans too. Deer-car collisions are not only expensive to fix, but can also be deadly for all parties. After graduating from BU in May 2022, Miller started work as a policy research specialist at the University of Virginia's Repair Lab, studying and developing policy solutions to coal dust pollution that affects predominantly Black communities near coal export terminals in coastal Virginia. "Tara is now focused on applied work helping people, using many of the skills acquired as a grad student while investigating wildlife health on a continental scale," Primack says. "It's really pretty fantastic." This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Research Traineeship-funded Boston University graduate program in Urban Biogeoscience and Environmental Health.

Thanks to the extensive network of cameras, GPS collars and other instruments, park staff and wildlife ecologists had an "unprecedented opportunity" to assemble a minute-by-minute view of how the storm affected the park and how the animals responded, said Hallie Brown, a postdoctoral research associate in Princeton's Department of Ecology and Environmental Biology and the first author of a new paper in Nature about the hurricane's impact. "This is the first study that has ever been able to track the real-time responses of a large-mammal community to a natural disaster," said Robert Pringle, an EEB professor who has worked with Gorongosa National Park since its inception. Brown, now a postdoctoral research associate in Pringle's lab, was a graduate student at the time with Ryan Long, an associate professor of wildlife sciences at the University of Idaho and a former Princeton postdoc. Long and Pringle shared senior author credits on the new Nature paper. "We watched the waters rise," Brown recalled. "We watched the animals' reactions in the hours, days, weeks after the cyclone: how some of them escaped the floodwaters, and some of them didn't. We used the data we had from before, during and after the storm to create, not just a description of this one event, but a broader set of expectations, so managers can better anticipate the effects of increasingly severe weather events." The research team found that the best predictor of survival was size. The tiny oribi, about the size of a greyhound, saw its population plummet by 50%. About half of the slightly larger reedbucks died as well. The bushbucks, which are the smallest species that can wear a GPS collar, saw three of its eight collared animals die -- the smallest male and the two smallest females -- but only lost 4% of their population overall. GPS data revealed that the bushbucks looked for hills to climb, including termite mound hillocks that reach up to 16 feet tall (5 meters) and 65 feet long (20 meters), which became islands in the flood. The researchers saw that one survivor hopscotched from mound to mound, passing quickly through the floodwaters in between, before finding safety in the woods at higher elevations. The four largest herbivores wearing GPS collars -- nyala, kudu, sable and elephant -- had no fatalities. Body size also offered a secondary protection, the researchers found. "Not only could the smaller-sized animals not outpace the waters, they were also not able to buffer the nutritional limitation afterwards," said Brown. "Because the flood was so high for so long, it killed a lot of the grasses and low-lying vegetation. Smaller animals can't withstand those nutritionally limited periods like larger animals, who have more fat to rely on." The only previous study of hurricane effects on island populations looked at lizards and spiders in the Bahamas and found very similar patterns. "It's incredible how the patterns we found cross taxonomic and geographic lines," said Brown. "They seem to play out the same ways in our terrestrial ecosystem, with the largest mammals on earth, and with these tiny little invertebrates and reptiles in the Bahamas." The researchers have two primary recommendations for other wildlife managers: evacuate the smallest and most ecologically vulnerable creatures to safer areas before storms come, and provide supplementary feed after the storm. Once all of the grasses have drowned, animals will turn to foraging on less-nutritious shrubs and bark, and many small creatures can't survive that dietary shift. The few carnivores in the park weathered the storm just fine, Brown said. The wild dogs and leopards benefited from having their prey animals concentrated in the upland areas, and the lions' primary food source -- warthogs -- stayed in the uplands for several months but were otherwise largely unaffected by the cyclone. The research team included institutions from five countries: Princeton University; the University of Idaho-Moscow; the University of California-Merced; Montana State University-Bozeman;Yale University; Archbold Biological Station in Venus, Florida; the University of British Columbia-Vancouver; Gorongosa National Park; the University of Kent; the University of the Witwatersrand-Johannesburg; Associac?a?o Azul Moc?ambique in Maputo, Mozambique. Other Princeton authors on the paper are then-graduate students Matt Hutchinson, Ph.D. 2021; Justine Atkins Becker, Ph.D. 2020; Arjun Potter, Ph.D. 2022; and then-NSF postdoctoral fellow Meredith Palmer. "For me, the most exciting thing about this paper is the incredible collaboration between so many groups of researchers, from hydrology to large animal ecology, to create this really integrated piece of science," Brown said. "The best work happens in collaborative projects."

The textbook narrative is that our ancestors felled the forests, drained the swamps and cultivated the heathland. In other words, they created the varied landscapes of meadows, heaths and grasslands that characterized our cultural landscapes before the advent of modern agriculture. But new research from Aarhus University suggests that this is not the case. Elena Pearce, postdoc at the Department of Biology at Aarhus University, and the lead author of the study explains. "The idea that the landscape was covered by dense forest across most of the continent is simply not right. Our results show that we need to reassess our view of what European nature is," she says, and her colleague and co-author Professor Jens-Christian Svenning continues: "Nature during the last interglacial period -- a period with a mild climate similar to today, but before modern humans arrived -- was full of variation. Importantly, the landscapes harboured large amounts of open and semi-open vegetation with shrubs, light-demanding trees and herbs alongside stands of tall-growing shade trees." Glacial and interglacial periods Variations in the Earth's orbit around the sun and shifts in the tectonic plates mean that our planet is impacted by long periods with colder temperatures. We call these periods ice ages or glacial periods. Researchers agree that there have been at least five major glacial periods during the Earth's four-billion-year history. The earliest glacial period was about 2 billion years ago and lasted for around 300 million years. Although it may seem confusing, we are actually in such a major glacial period right now. Researchers also divide the glacial periods into cold and warm periods, namely the individual ice ages and intermittent warmer periods, the interglacials The current glacial period has lasted for almost 2.6 million years, but we are currently in an interglacial period, now being exacerbated and likely prolonged by human greenhouse gas emissions. The study is about the previous interglacial period, which lasted from 129,000 years ago to around 115,000 years ago. In Europe, this interglacial period is called Eem. Ancient pollen samples reveal what nature was like Samples of ancient pollen helped the research team identify which plants grew more than 100,000 years ago in the last interglacial period. The research group integrated data from pollen samples from large parts of Europe. The samples reveal that plants that do not thrive in dense forest often constituted large components of the vegetation. "Tall-growing shade trees like spruce, linden, beech and hornbeam will be most prevalent in dense forests. However, the results show that hazel often covered large areas of the landscapes. Hazel is a bush that doesn't grow in large quantities in dense forest," says Jens-Christian Svenning. In the world of plants, competition for sunlight is fierce. The trees that reach highest with their crowns can capture the most sunlight and win that competition. In beech forests, trees take almost all the sunlight. This means that other, smaller trees and shrubs, such as hazel, cannot grow in a beech forest. "Hazel thrives in the open countryside and in open or disturbed forest, and tolerates disturbance from large animals. Whereas species like beech and spruce often are severely damaged or killed by cutting or browsing, hazel can manage without problems. Even if you cut down a hazel, it will still produce lots of new shoots," he says. "For this reason, hazel was often very common in historical coppice woodlands." What pollen can reveal about the past Almost all trees, flowers and shrubs give off pollen. Pollen is to plants what sperm cells are to animals. In order for a plant to seed, its egg cells must be pollinated. Pollen is spread by the wind or by insects. A lot of pollen lands on the ground, where it cannot pollinate other plants. Instead, it is eaten by insects or degraded by microorganisms. However, a small amount of pollen lands in lakes, bogs or streams, where it falls to the seabed. Below the surface, there is often no oxygen and no life, and the pollen is preserved over hundreds of thousands of years in the soil layers. By looking at the composition of different types of pollen in the soil layers of ancient, buried wetlands, researchers can deduce what the vegetation looked like more than 100,000 years ago. Large animals kept the landscape open So there are indications that Europe was not covered by dense forest before humans came into existence. But what did the landscape actually look like? According to calculations from the new study, somewhere between 50 and 75 per cent of the landscape was covered by open or semi-open vegetation. And this is most likely due to the large mammals that lived at that time, explains Jens-Christian Svenning. "We know that a lot of large animals lived in Europe at that time. Aurochs, horses, bison, elephants and rhinos. They must have consumed large amounts of plant biomass and thereby had the capacity to keep the tree-growth in check," he says and continues: "Of course, it's also likely that other factors such as floods and forest fires also played a part. But there's no evidence to suggest that this caused enough disturbance. For example, forest fires encourage pine trees, but mostly we did not find pine as a dominant species." Although the research group cannot be 100 percent certain about the extent to which large animals were behind the open areas, there are strong indications that they were. Firstly, large animals such as bison have exactly that effect in areas where they are still found in European forests. Furthermore, beetle fossils from the last interglacial period also show that many large animals lived at that time. "We have looked at a number of finds of beetle fossils from that time in the UK. Although there are beetle species that thrive in forests with frequent forest fires, we found none of them in the fossil data. Instead, we found large quantities dung beetles, and this shows that parts of the landscape have been densely populated by large herbivores," he says. Merck's rhinoceros with pollen between its teeth There are many indications that large animals kept the landscape varied before humans came, with large areas of open and semi-open vegetation. A very special study from Poland further underlines this theory, says Jens-Christian Svenning. "In Poland, researchers have taken a closer look at fossils from Merck's rhinoceros to see what this large animal lived on. They found remnants of pollen and twigs between its teeth, and when they analysed them, they could see that a large amount came from hazel," he says and continues: "So the rhinoceros has trudged around eating branches and leaves from hazel bushes. This supports the theory that the large animals have affected the vegetation, perhaps just like historical coppice woodlands. At the same time, marks of its teeth suggest it had foraged a lot on grass and sedges through its life time." An argument for rewilding Not only do we need to rewrite the biology books, but the new findings provide new data to support trophic rewilding, which is the restoration of biodiverse, self-regulated ecosystems via the re-establishment of food-web processes, notably as mediated by wild megafauna species. The results in the study support that large animals have an essential role to play in restoration, as Elena Pearce explains. "Now we know that there was a great deal of variation in the landscape. Everything suggests that this variation arose because of large animals affecting the vegetation structure. Many of the large animals from the interglacial period are now extinct, but we still have bison, horses and oxen," she says and concludes: "Without large animals, natural areas become dominated by dense vegetation, in which many species of plants and butterflies, for example, cannot thrive. Therefore, it's important we restore large animals to the ecosystems if we are to encourage biodiversity."

The Malvinoxhosan biota were a group of marine animals that thrived in cooler waters. They included various types of shellfish, many of which are now extinct. "The origin and disappearance of these animals have remained an enigma for nearly two centuries until now," says Dr. Penn-Clarke. The researchers collected and analysed a vast amount of fossil data. They used advanced data analysis techniques to sort through layers of ancient rock based on the types of fossils found in them. Imagine it like sorting through layers of a cake, each with different ingredients. They then identified at least 7 to 8 distinct layers, each showing fewer and fewer types of marine animals over time. These findings were then compared with how the environment and sea levels have changed, as well as with global temperature records from that ancient period. They found that these marine animals went through several phases of declining numbers of different species, which correlated with changes in sea levels and climate. It was a difficult process. "This research is around 12-15 years in the making, and it wasn't an easy journey," shares Dr. Penn-Clarke. "I was only able to overcome all the different challenges through dogged persistence and perseverance." Their research suggests that the Malvinoxhosan biota survived during a long period of global cooling. Dr Penn-Clarke elaborates, "We think that cooler conditions allowed for the creation of circumpolar thermal barriers -- essentially, ocean currents near the poles -- that isolated these animals and led to their specialisation." As the climate warmed up again, these animals disappeared. They were replaced by more generalist marine species that are well-adapted to warmer waters. Shifts in sea levels during the Early-Middle Devonian period probably disrupted natural ocean barriers that had kept waters cooler at the South Pole. This allowed warmer waters from regions closer to the equator to flow in, setting the stage for marine animals that thrive in warmer conditions to move into these areas. As a result, these warm-water species gradually took over, leading to the decline and eventual disappearance of the specialized, cool-water Malvinoxhosan marine animals. The extinction of the Malvinoxhosan biota led to a complete collapse in polar ecosystems, as biodiversity in these regions never recovered. "This suggests a complete collapse in the functioning of polar environments and ecosystems to the point that they could never recover," Dr. Penn-Clarke adds. He likens this research to playing a game of Cluedo. "It's a 390-million-year-old murder mystery. We now know that the combined effects of changes in sea-level and temperature were the most likely 'smoking gun' behind this extinction event," he notes. It is still unknown if this extinction event can be correlated with known extinction events at the same time elsewhere during the Early-Middle Devonian as researchers simply do not have any real good age inferences. The mystery deepens further, and it is far from over. Interestingly, similar declines in biodiversity controlled by sea-level changes have been observed in South America. This points to a broader pattern of environmental change affecting the South Polar region during this period and underscores the vulnerability of polar ecosystems, even in the past. "This research is important when we consider the biodiversity crisis we are facing in the present day," says Dr. Penn-Clarke. "It demonstrates the sensitivity of polar environments and ecosystems to changes in sea level and temperature. Any changes that occur are, unfortunately, permanent." During the Early-Middle Devonian period, a large landmass called Gondwana -- which included parts of today's Africa, South America, and Antarctica -- was located near the South Pole. Unlike today's icy conditions, the climate was warmer, and the sea levels were higher, flooding most of the land. The Malvinoxhosan biota were a group of marine animals that thrived in cooler waters. They included various types of shellfish, many of which are now extinct. "The origin and disappearance of these animals have remained an enigma for nearly two centuries until now," says Dr. Penn-Clarke. The researchers collected and analysed a vast amount of fossil data. They used advanced data analysis techniques to sort through layers of ancient rock based on the types of fossils found in them. Imagine it like sorting through layers of a cake, each with different ingredients. They then identified at least 7 to 8 distinct layers, each showing fewer and fewer types of marine animals over time. These findings were then compared with how the environment and sea levels have changed, as well as with global temperature records from that ancient period. They found that these marine animals went through several phases of declining numbers of different species, which correlated with changes in sea levels and climate. It was a difficult process. "This research is around 12-15 years in the making, and it wasn't an easy journey," shares Dr. Penn-Clarke. "I was only able to overcome all the different challenges through dogged persistence and perseverance." Their research suggests that the Malvinoxhosan biota survived during a long period of global cooling. Dr Penn-Clarke elaborates, "We think that cooler conditions allowed for the creation of circumpolar thermal barriers -- essentially, ocean currents near the poles -- that isolated these animals and led to their specialisation." As the climate warmed up again, these animals disappeared. They were replaced by more generalist marine species that are well-adapted to warmer waters. Shifts in sea levels during the Early-Middle Devonian period probably disrupted natural ocean barriers that had kept waters cooler at the South Pole. This allowed warmer waters from regions closer to the equator to flow in, setting the stage for marine animals that thrive in warmer conditions to move into these areas. As a result, these warm-water species gradually took over, leading to the decline and eventual disappearance of the specialized, cool-water Malvinoxhosan marine animals. The extinction of the Malvinoxhosan biota led to a complete collapse in polar ecosystems, as biodiversity in these regions never recovered. "This suggests a complete collapse in the functioning of polar environments and ecosystems to the point that they could never recover," Dr. Penn-Clarke adds. He likens this research to playing a game of Cluedo. "It's a 390-million-year-old murder mystery. We now know that the combined effects of changes in sea-level and temperature were the most likely 'smoking gun' behind this extinction event," he notes. It is still unknown if this extinction event can be correlated with known extinction events at the same time elsewhere during the Early-Middle Devonian as researchers simply do not have any real good age inferences. The mystery deepens further, and it is far from over. Interestingly, similar declines in biodiversity controlled by sea-level changes have been observed in South America. This points to a broader pattern of environmental change affecting the South Polar region during this period and underscores the vulnerability of polar ecosystems, even in the past. "This research is important when we consider the biodiversity crisis we are facing in the present day," says Dr. Penn-Clarke. "It demonstrates the sensitivity of polar environments and ecosystems to changes in sea level and temperature. Any changes that occur are, unfortunately, permanent."

Analysis of platypus DNA in rivers and creek water samples collected before and after the Black Summer 2019-2020 megafires suggest Australia's beloved semi-aquatic monotremes might be abandoning severely bushfire-affected areas for up to 18 months after a fire, especially if heavy rainfall has followed the fire. The study uses the recent technique of environmental DNA sampling, where animal DNA is collected from water, soil, air, or snow rather than directly from the animal itself. This helps scientists indirectly record hard-to-spot animals like the platypus, which are shy, low in number and venture out mostly at night. The survey, funded by the San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance and published today in the journal Biological Conservation , is the first landscape scale study of how platypuses might respond to increases in bushfires and rainfall caused by climate change. Lead researcher Dr Emily McColl-Gausden, from the Faculty of Science, said the results suggest that a combination of severe bushfire followed by heavy rainfall hit platypus the hardest. "We simply don't know how the platypus responds to bushfire. We assume because they are near water, they will be relatively unaffected. While there is more work to do, our research tells us that severe fire followed by intense rain is the worst combination for platypuses," Dr McColl-Gausden said. "Fire might not directly kill platypus because their burrows protect them. But when there is rainfall after a fire, as happened in 2019-2020, unstable soil, dead plants and ash and debris can wash into rivers and creeks. This kills the yabbies, aquatic invertebrates and insect larvae that platypus rely on for food and may force them to abandon the site. "While the platypus may eventually come back, we don't know the effect of repeated bushfires, whether on their reproduction and life cycle, the survival of their young, on their food security, or on the impact of being forced to move their burrows to more suitable sites. We don't know if the platypus may one day leave the area for good." Researchers repeatedly sampled 118 sites in Victoria and NSW, 57 of which were later affected by the 2019-2020 bushfires. This allowed researchers to have a comparison between fire-affected and non fire-affected sites. They collected samples before the fires, within 6 months after the fires and between 12 and 18 months after the fires, giving them data from three points in time. Across fire-affected sites, there was a 78 per cent chance a platypus was in an area before the fire, and a 72 per cent chance one year after the fire, before rising again to 79 per cent. Watersheds are areas of land that drain rainwater into local streams and creeks. When there was heavy rainfall across a site's watershed and that watershed experienced high severity fire across a quarter or more of its area, the probability that platypus lived at a site fell to less than 10 per cent, indicating that platypus had died or had abandoned the area. "In Australia, fire helps shape animal and plant distributions. But there is evidence that a new pattern is emerging, where fires are more frequent, bigger, and more severe due to warming and drying trends," Dr McColl-Gausden said. Environmental DNA sampling is a useful addition to traditional methods that use humane traps to hold platypus until they can be recorded. While traps give scientists useful data such as age, sex and general health, environmental DNA sampling allows researchers to rapidly monitor large areas of land after a natural disaster like a bushfire. "Thousands of species of animals live in areas affected by the 2019-2020 mega fires," Dr McColl-Gausden said. "Systematic surveys will help us understand how platypus and other native species might be harmed by increases in the number, scale and severity of bushfires, and what governments and the community can do to reduce the cumulative effect of more frequent and more severe bushfires. We need to include this surveillance as part of our normal emergency response."

Once thought to be primarily confined to the nutrient-poor waters of the Sargasso Sea, sargassum is now recognized as a rapidly growing and widely distributed marine organism, whose expansion across the Atlantic is closely linked to both natural processes and human-induced nutrient enrichment. The review, published in the journal Harmful Algae , sheds new light on the origins and development of the Great Atlantic Sargassum Belt, a massive recurring bloom of sargassum that stretches across the Atlantic Ocean from the coast of West Africa to the Gulf of America. Since its first appearance in 2011, this belt has formed nearly every year - except in 2013 - and in May, reached a new record biomass of 37.5 million tons. This does not include the baseline biomass of 7.3 million tons historically estimated in the Sargasso Sea. By combining historical oceanographic observations, modern satellite imagery, and advanced biogeochemical analyses, this review provides a comprehensive framework for understanding the dramatic changes in sargassum distribution, productivity and nutrient dynamics. It also highlights the broader implications of anthropogenic nutrient enrichment on ocean ecology and the need for coordinated international efforts to monitor and manage the impacts of these massive seaweed blooms. "Our review takes a deep dive into the changing story of sargassum - how it's growing, what's fueling that growth, and why we're seeing such a dramatic increase in biomass across the North Atlantic," said Brian Lapointe, Ph.D., lead author and a research professor at FAU Harbor Branch. "By examining shifts in its nutrient composition - particularly nitrogen, phosphorus and carbon - and how those elements vary over time and space, we're beginning to understand the larger environmental forces at play." Early in the review, Lapointe and co-authors Deanna F. Webber, research coordinator; and Rachel Brewton, Ph.D., an assistant research professor, both with FAU Harbor Branch, explain that early oceanographers charted the Sargasso Sea based on surface sightings of sargassum, believing the seaweed thrived in its warm, clear, but nutrient-poor waters. However, this notion created a paradox when mid-20th-century oceanographers described the region as a "biological desert." However, recent satellite observations, ocean circulation models, and field studies have resolved this paradox by tracing the seasonal transport of sargassum from nutrient-rich coastal areas, particularly the western Gulf of America, to the open ocean via the Loop Current and Gulf Stream. These findings support early theories by explorers who proposed that Gulf-originating sargassum could feed populations in the Sargasso Sea. Remote sensing technology played a pivotal role in these discoveries. In 2004 and 2005, satellites captured extensive sargassum windrows - long, narrow lines or bands of floating sargassum - in the western Gulf of America, a region experiencing increased nutrient loads from river systems such as the Mississippi and Atchafalaya. "These nutrient-rich waters fueled high biomass events along the Gulf Coast, resulting in mass strandings, costly beach cleanups and even the emergency shutdown of a Florida nuclear power plant in 1991," Lapointe said. "A major focus of our review is the elemental composition of sargassum tissue and how it has changed over time." Laboratory experiments and field research dating back to the 1980s confirmed that sargassum grows more quickly and is more productive in nutrient-enriched neritic waters than in the oligotrophic waters of the open ocean. Controlled studies revealed that the two primary species, sargassum natans and sargassum fluitans, can double their biomass in just 11 days under optimal conditions. These studies also established that phosphorus is often the primary limiting nutrient for growth, although nitrogen also plays a critical role. From the 1980s to the 2020s, the nitrogen content of sargassum increased by more than 50%, while phosphorus content decreased slightly, leading to a sharp rise in the nitrogen-to-phosphorus (N:P) ratio. "These changes reflect a shift away from natural oceanic nutrient sources like upwelling and vertical mixing, and toward land-based inputs such as agricultural runoff, wastewater discharge and atmospheric deposition," said Lapointe. "Carbon levels in sargassum also rose, contributing to changes in overall stoichiometry and further highlighting the impact of external nutrient loading on marine primary producers." The review also explores how nutrient recycling within sargassum windrows, including excretion by associated marine organisms and microbial breakdown of organic matter, can sustain growth in nutrient-poor environments. This micro-scale recycling is critical in maintaining sargassum populations in parts of the ocean that would otherwise not support high levels of productivity. Data from sargassum collected near the Amazon River mouth support the hypothesis that nutrient outflows from this major river contribute significantly to the development of the GASB. Variations in sargassum biomass have been linked to flood and drought cycles in the Amazon basin, further connecting land-based nutrient inputs to the open ocean. The formation of the GASB appears to have been seeded by an extreme atmospheric event - the negative phase of the North Atlantic Oscillation in 2009 to 2010, which may have helped shift surface waters and sargassum from the Sargasso Sea southward into the tropical Atlantic. However, the researchers caution that there is no direct evidence of this movement. Moreover, genetic and morphological data suggest that some sargassum populations, particularly the dominant S. natans var. wingei , were already present in the tropical Atlantic prior to 2011, indicating that this region may have had an overlooked role in the early development of the GASB. "The expansion of sargassum isn't just an ecological curiosity - it has real impacts on coastal communities. The massive blooms can clog beaches, affect fisheries and tourism, and pose health risks," said Lapointe. "Understanding why sargassum is growing so much is crucial for managing these impacts. Our review helps to connect the dots between land-based nutrient pollution, ocean circulation, and the unprecedented expansion of sargassum across an entire ocean basin." This work was funded by the Florida Department of Emergency Management, United States Environmental Protection Agency, South Florida Program Project, and the NOAA Monitoring and Event Response for Harmful Algal Blooms program. Historical studies included within the review were funded by the NASA Ocean Biology and Biogeochemistry Program and Ecological Forecast Program, NOAA RESTORE Science Program, National Science Foundation, "Save Our Seas" Specialty License Plate and discretionary funds, granted through the Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute Foundation, and a Red Wright Fellowship from the Bermuda Biological Station.

In the study, published in Nature Oncogene , a world-leading international team of scientists and clinicians explore the potential of necrosis -- when cells die unexpectedly as a result of infection, injury or disease -- to reshape our understanding and treatment of age-related conditions. Challenging prevailing views, the paper brings together evidence from cancer biology, regenerative medicine, kidney disease, and space health to argue that necrosis is not merely an endpoint, but a key driver of aging that presents an opportunity for intervention. Dr Keith Siew, an author of the study from UCL Centre for Kidney & Bladder Health, said: "Nobody really likes talking about death, even cell death, which is perhaps why the physiology of death is so poorly understood. And in a way necrosis is death. If enough cells die, then tissues die, then we die. The question is what would happen if we could pause or stop necrosis." Dr Carina Kern, lead author of the study and CEO of LinkGevity, a biotech company based at Cambridge's Babraham Research Campus and part of the NASA Space-Health program, said: "Necrosis remains one of the last frontiers in medicine -- a common thread across aging, disease, space biology, and scientific progress itself." Cells are the fundamental building blocks of life and can die in various ways. 'Programmed' forms of cell death are beneficial, carefully orchestrated processes that allow our tissues to replenish themselves and function well throughout life. But 'unprogrammed' cell death, or necrosis, is an uncontrolled and catastrophic process that leads to tissue degeneration and biological decline. At the centre of the necrotic process is calcium, a vital resource that effectively controls the cell by determining which functions are switched on or off. Calcium ions are normally maintained at a level that is 10,000 to 100,000 times higher outside the cell than inside of it. When this finely tuned balance fails, calcium floods the cell like an electrical short circuit, pushing the cell into chaos. Unlike programmed death, where cells dismantle in an orderly manner, necrosis causes cells to rupture, spilling toxic molecules into surrounding tissues. This sparks a chain reaction that causes widespread inflammation and affects tissue repair, creating a snowball effect that ultimately leads to frailty and the onset of chronic age-related conditions such as kidney disease, heart disease and Alzheimer's. Dr Siew added: "When cells die, it's not always a peaceful process for the neighbours." Dr Kern explains: "Necrosis has been hiding in plain sight. As a final stage of cell death, it's been largely overlooked. But mounting evidence shows it's far more than an endpoint. It's a central mechanism through which systemic degeneration not only arises but also spreads. That makes it a critical point of convergence across many diseases. If we can target necrosis, we could unlock entirely new ways to treat conditions ranging from kidney failure to cardiac disease, neurodegeneration, and even aging itself." Notably, it is in the kidneys that necrosis may have its most devastating and underappreciated impact. Necrosis induces kidney disease, which can lead to kidney failure requiring a transplant or dialysis. By age 75 nearly half of all individuals develop some degree of kidney disease as part of the natural aging process. Dr Siew added: "With kidney disease, there's no one underlying reason that the kidneys fail. It could be a lack of oxygen, inflammation, oxidative stress, a build-up of toxins, and so on. All of these stressors eventually lead to necrosis, which initiates a positive feedback loop that spirals out of control, leading to kidney failure. We can't stop all of these stressors, but if you could intervene at the point of necrosis, you'd effectively achieve the same result." Another area where interrupting necrosis could have a big impact is spaceflight, where astronauts often experience accelerated aging and kidney-related decline due to the effects of low gravity and exposure to cosmic radiation. A 2024 study involving Dr Siew demonstrated that the human kidney may be the ultimate bottleneck for long-duration space missions. The authors say finding solutions to this accelerated aging and kidney disease may be the final frontier for human deep space exploration. Professor Damian Bailey, an author of the paper from the University of South Wales and Chair of the European Space Agency (ESA) Life Sciences Working Group, said: "Targeting necrosis offers potential to not only transform longevity on Earth but also push the frontiers of space exploration. In space, the same factors that cause aging on Earth are made worse by cosmic radiation and microgravity -- speeding up degeneration dramatically." Dr Kern added: "In many age-related diseases -- affecting diverse organs such as the lungs, kidneys, liver, brain, and cardiovascular system -- relentless cascades of necrosis fuel the progression of disease. This is often alongside impaired healing that leads to fibrosis, inflammation and damaged cells. Each cascade triggers and amplifies the next. "If we could prevent necrosis, even temporarily, we would be shutting down these destructive cycles at their source, enabling normal physiological processes and cell division to resume -- and potentially even allowing for regeneration." The paper is a collaborative effort by clinicians and scientists from institutions including UCL Division of Medicine, Harvard Medical School-affiliated Brigham and Women's Hospital, Mayo Clinic, NASA Space-Health program, MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, University of South Wales, and the European Space Agency.

The drug, called SBI-810, is part of a new generation of compounds designed to target a receptor on the nerves and spinal cord. While opioids flood multiple cellular pathways indiscriminately, SBI-810, a non-opioid treatment, takes a more focused approach, activating only a specific pain-relief pathway that avoids the euphoric "high" linked to addiction. In tests in mice, SBI-810 worked well on its own and, when used in combination, made opioids more effective at lower doses, according to the study published May 19 in Cell . "What makes this compound exciting is that it is both analgesic and non-opioid," said senior study author Ru-Rong Ji, PhD, an anesthesiology and neurobiology researcher who directs the Duke Anesthesiology Center for Translational Pain Medicine. Even more encouraging: it prevented common side effects like constipation and buildup of tolerance, which often forces patients to need stronger and more frequent doses of opioids over time. SBI-810 is in early development, but Duke researchers are aiming for human trials soon and they've locked in multiple patents for the discovery. There's an urgent need for pain relief alternatives. Drug overdose deaths are declining, but more than 80,000 Americans still die each year most often from opioids. Meanwhile, chronic pain affects one-third of the U.S. population. Researchers said the drug could be a safer option for treating both short-term and chronic pain for those recovering from surgery or living with diabetic nerve pain. SBI-810 is designed to target the brain receptor neurotensin receptor 1. Using a method known as biased agonism, it switches on a specific signal -- β-arrestin-2 -- linked to pain relief, while avoiding other signals that can cause side effects or addiction. "The receptor is expressed on sensory neurons and the brain and spinal cord," Ji said. "It's a promising target for treating acute and chronic pain." SBI-810 effectively relieved pain from surgical incisions, bone fractures, and nerve injuries better than some existing painkillers. When injected in mice, it reduced signs of spontaneous discomfort, such as guarding and facial grimacing. Duke scientists compared SBI-810 to oliceridine, a newer type of opioid used in hospitals, and found SBI-810 worked better in some situations, with fewer signs of distress. Unlike opioids like morphine, SBI-810 didn't cause tolerance after repeated use. It also outperformed gabapentin, a common drug for nerve pain, and didn't cause sedation or memory problems, which are often seen with gabapentin. Researchers said the compound's dual action -- on both the peripheral and central nervous systems -- could offer a new kind of balance in pain medicine: powerful enough to work, yet specific enough to avoid harm. The study was supported by the NIH and the Department of Defense. Additional Duke authors include first authors Ran Guo and Ouyang Chen; Sangsu Bang, Sharat Chandra, Yize Li, Gang Chen, Rou-Gang Xie, Wei He, Jing Xu, Richard Zhou, Shaoyong Song, Ivan Spasojevic, Marc G. Caron, William C. Wetsel and Lawrence S. Barak.

The study, published in Nature Geoscience , was conducted by scientists from Rutgers University, the University of Arizona and collaborators from India, China and Europe. To reach their conclusions, the scientists examined how the monsoon, which brings heavy rains to the Indian subcontinent, has influenced the Bay of Bengal's marine productivity over the past 22,000 years. Although the Bay of Bengal covers less than 1% of the global ocean, it supplies nearly 8% of the world's fishery production. Its coastal waters support densely populated regions that rely heavily on marine resources for food and livelihoods. "Millions of people living along the Bay of Bengal rely on the sea for protein, particularly from fisheries," said Yair Rosenthal, a Distinguished Professor in the Department of Marine and Coastal Sciences and the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences at Rutgers University and an author of the study. "The productivity of these waters -- the ability of the ocean to support plankton growth -- is the foundation of the marine food web. If ocean productivity declines, it will powerfully affect the ecosystem, ultimately reducing fish stocks and threatening food security for coastal communities." The monsoon is essential for providing freshwater to the region, but the researchers found that both extremely strong and extremely weak monsoon periods over the centuries caused a significant disruption -- a 50% reduction in food available for marine life at the surface. This occurred because these extreme conditions inhibited mixing between the deep and surface zones of the ocean, preventing nutrients from reaching the upper region where marine life thrives. With climate change expected to make the monsoon more intense and variable, and those extremes provoking stratification of the ocean layers, the food supply produced by the Bay of Bengal may be threatened, researchers said. To understand how the Indian summer monsoon and ocean productivity have changed over time, scientists studied the fossil shells of foraminifera -- tiny single-celled plankton that live in the ocean and build calcium carbonate shells. The shells preserve information about the environment they grew in, acting like natural recorders of past ocean and climate conditions. "By analyzing their chemistry and tracking the abundance of certain types that thrive in productive waters, we reconstructed long-term changes in rainfall, ocean temperatures and marine life in the Bay of Bengal," said geoscientist Kaustubh Thirumalai, an assistant professor at the University of Arizona and lead author of the study. "Together, these chemical signals helped us understand how the monsoon and ocean conditions responded to global climate changes over the past 22,000 years." The sediments analyzed were recovered from the seafloor by scientists aboard the National Science Foundation-funded research vessel JOIDES Resolution as part of the International Ocean Discovery Program. The researchers found that productivity of the Bay of Bengal's waters collapsed during periods of very weak monsoons, such as Heinrich Stadial 1, and very strong monsoons, such as those in the early Holocene. The period known as Heinrich Stadial 1, a significantly cold period, occurred between 17,500 and 15,500 years ago. The early Holocene, a time marked by rapid warming and sea level rise because of melting glaciers, occurred between about 10,500 and 9,500 years ago. The amount of monsoon rainfall controls the volume of river discharge into the Bay of Bengal. The freshwater significantly changes oceanographic conditions and affects the feeding cycle of fish and plankton. When monsoon rains are too intense, a freshwater layer can cap the ocean surface, blocking nutrients from below. Without nutrients, plankton growth drops -- and with it, the entire food chain, including fish. Weaker monsoons also suppress nutrient delivery by reducing ocean circulation and wind-driven mixing. "Both extremes threaten marine resource availability," Thirumalai said. When researchers compared ancient patterns with modern ocean data and model projections, they found an unsettling parallel: Future scenarios project warmer surface waters and stronger freshwater runoff, conditions that match past intervals when marine productivity dropped sharply. Compounding the risk, future winds may not be strong enough to counteract the stratification that suppresses mixing. Looking at past climate patterns helps scientists understand how the interconnected components and processes that compose the physical Earth, including its atmosphere and biosphere, affect the climate, environment and all organisms over long timescales. "The relationship between monsoons and ocean biology we have uncovered in the Bay of Bengal gives us real-world evidence of how marine ecosystems have reacted to warming and monsoon shifts and may do so in the future," Rosenthal said. "These insights can help refine projections and inform sustainable management of fisheries and coastal resources as the impacts of climate change accelerate." Kaixuan Bu, an assistant research professor with the Department of Marine and Coastal Sciences at Rutgers-New Brunswick, also contributed to this study.

The novel chemicals, called cyanine-carborane salts, and their role in the next-generation of cancer treatments, are described in a new article published in Angewandte Chemie , a journal of the German Chemical Society. Photodynamic therapy, or PDT, has been used for decades to treat forms of skin and bladder cancers. It works by flooding a patient's body with light-sensitive chemicals that accumulate in cancer cells. Shining a light on the patient activates the chemicals and kills the diseased cells. The light causes the chemicals to generate highly reactive oxygen molecules -- like tiny biochemical firecrackers -- that break down cancer cells from the inside while leaving healthy cells unharmed. It is a useful therapy with several drawbacks that limit its effectiveness, including prolonged light sensitivity, poor tissue penetration and off-target toxicity. These drawbacks can prevent complete tumor eradication and may lead to a recurrence of the cancer. The multidisciplinary research team is composed of scientists from University of California, Riverside and Michigan State University, or MSU. "Cyanine-carborane salts minimize these challenges, offering a safer, more precise way to destroy tumors completely while sparing healthy tissue," said Professor Sophia Lunt, MSU cancer researcher and co-principal investigator of the project. The researchers said current FDA-approved PDT chemicals remain in the body for extended periods of time. After treatment, patients have to stay in the dark for two to three months because even low levels of light will cause them to become blistered and burned. In contrast, the researchers found that cyanine-carborane salts flush out of the body more quickly, remaining only in the cancer cells requiring treatment. Vincent Lavallo, UCR chemistry professor and co-prinicipal investigator, is an expert on the synthesis of carboranes. "The most interesting thing is the targeting ability of this substance we made to go right where it's needed and stay there while the rest passes through. That way you'll only kill the cells right where the cancer is but not harm the patient," Lavallo said. Lavallo worked together with Richard Lunt, MSU endowed professor of chemical engineering, to develop the cyanine-carborane salts. Unlike conventional PDT agents, the salts exploit a natural vulnerability in cancer cells. They're taken up by proteins called OATPs that are overexpressed in tumors. This allows for precise targeting without the need for costly additional chemicals currently used with PDT to help target the cancer cells. Traditional PDT is also limited in its ability to treat deep-seated tumors because it works with wavelengths of light that only penetrate a few millimeters into the body. Once inside cancer cells, cyanine-carborane salts can be activated by near-infrared light that is able to move deeper into tissues. This could expand the range of cancers that could be treated. Given their success, researchers are encouraged to continue the research and try to expand the types of cancer therapies the salts can be used with. It may be possible to alter the salts so that they can be used with energy sources other than light that penetrate even more deeply into the body. "Our work offers a targeted, safe, and cost-effective treatment for aggressive breast cancers with limited treatment options," said Amir Roshanzadeh, paper first author and MSU cell & molecular biology graduate student. "It also opens the door to breakthroughs in other approaches for cancer therapy and targeted drug delivery."

But sometimes, as in the corporate world, outright theft can be a quicker way to achieve dominance. University of California, Berkeley biologists have shown that several species of fruit fly have stolen a successful defense from bacteria to survive predation by parasitic wasps, which in some flies can turn half of all fly larvae into surrogate wombs for baby wasps -- a gruesome fate that inspired the creature in the 1979 movie "Alien." Bacteria and other microbes are famous for stealing genes from other microbes or viruses; this so-called horizontal gene transfer is the source of troublesome antibiotic resistance among disease-causing microbes. But it's thought to be less common in multicellular organisms, such as insects and humans. Understanding how common it is in animals and how these genes are co-opted and shared can help scientists understand the evolution of animal immune defenses and could point the way to human therapies to fight parasitic or infectious diseases or cancer, itself a kind of parasite. "It's a model for understanding how immune systems evolve, including our immune system, which also contains horizontally transferred genes," said Noah Whiteman, UC Berkeley professor of molecular and cell biology and of integrative biology and director of the campus's Essig Museum of Entomology. Last year, the researchers and their colleagues in Hungary used CRISPR genome editing to knock out the gene responsible for the defense in one widespread fly species, Drosophila ananassae , and found that nearly all the genetically modified flies died from predation by parasitic wasps. In a new study published Dec. 20 in the journal Current Biology , the biologists demonstrated that this defense -- a gene that encodes a toxin -- can be edited into the genome of the common laboratory fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster , to make them resistant to parasitoid wasps as well. The gene essentially becomes part of the fly's immune system, one weapon in its armamentarium to fend off parasites. The results demonstrate how crucial the stolen defense is to fly survival and highlights a strategy that may be more common in animals that scientists suspect. "This shows that horizontal gene transfer is an underappreciated way that rapid evolution happens in animals," said UC Berkeley doctoral student Rebecca Tarnopol, first author of the Current Biology paper. "People appreciate horizontal gene transfer as one of the major drivers of rapid adaptation in microbes, but these events were thought to be super uncommon in animals. But at least in insects, it seems like they're fairly frequent." According to Whiteman, senior author of the paper, "The study shows that in order to keep up with the barrage of parasites that are continually evolving new ways to overcome host defenses, a good strategy for animals is to borrow genes from even more rapidly evolving viruses and bacteria, and that's just what these flies have done." Gene flow from virus to bacteria to fly Whiteman studies how insects evolve to resist the toxins that plants produce to prevent being eaten. In 2023, he published a book, "Most Delicious Poison," about the plant toxins that humans have come to enjoy, such as caffeine and nicotine. One plant-herbivore interaction he focuses on is that between the common fruit fly Scaptomyza flava and sour-tasting mustard plants, like the cresses that grow in streams throughout the world. "The larvae, the immature stages of the fly, live in the leaves of the plant. They're leaf miners, they leave little trails in the leaves," Whiteman said. "They're true parasites of the plant and the plant's trying to kill them with its specialized chemicals. We study that arms race." What he's learned, however, likely applies to many other insects, among the most successful herbivores on Earth. "These are obscure little flies, but if you think about the fact that half of all living insect species are herbivores, it's a very popular life history. Understanding the evolution of that is really important for understanding evolution in general in terms of how successful herbivores are," he said. Several years ago, after sequencing the fly's genome in search of genes that allow it to resist mustard toxins, he discovered an unusual gene that he learned was widespread in bacteria. A search through earlier published genome sequences turned up the same gene in a related fly, Drosophila ananassae , as well as in a bacteria that lives inside an aphid. Researchers studying the aphid uncovered a complicated story: The gene actually comes from a bacterial virus, or bacteriophage, that infects the bacteria that live inside the aphid. The bacteriophage gene, expressed by the bacteria, makes the aphid resistant to a parasitic wasp that plagues it. These wasps lay their eggs inside the larvae, or maggots, and remain there until the larvae turn into immobile pupae, at which point the wasp eggs mature into wasp larvae that consume the fly pupa, eventually emerging as adults. When Tarnopol first used gene editing to express the toxin gene in all cells of D. melanogaster, all the flies died. But when Tarnopol expressed the gene only in certain immune cells, the fly became as resistant to parasites as its cousin, D. ananassae . Whiteman, Tarnopol, and their colleagues subsequently discovered that the gene found in the genome of D. ananassae -- a fusion between two toxin genes, cytolethal distending toxin B ( cdtB ) and apoptosis inducing protein of 56kDa ( aip56 ), that the researchers called fusionB -- codes for an enzyme that cuts up DNA. To discover how this nuclease is able to kill a wasp egg, the UC Berkeley researchers reached out to István Andó at the Institute of Genetics of the HUN-REN Biological Research Centre in Szeged, Hungary, which had previously shown that these same flies have a cellular defense against wasp eggs that essentially walls off the eggs from the fly's body and kills them. Andó and his lab colleagues created antibodies to the toxin that allowed them to track it through the fly's body and found that the nuclease essentially floods the fly's body to surround and kill the egg. "We've been finding this huge untapped world of humoral immune factors that might be at play in the immune system of invertebrates," Tarnopol said. "Our paper is one of the first ones to show, at least in Drosophila, that this type of immune response might be a common mechanism by which natural enemies like wasps and nematodes are dealt with. They are way more lethal in nature than some of the microbial infections that most people work with." Whiteman and his colleagues are still exploring the complexities of these interactions between fly and wasp, and the cellular and genetic changes that allowed the flies to synthesize a toxin without killing itself. "If the gene is expressed in the wrong tissue, the fly is going to die. That gene is never going to sweep through populations through natural selection," Whiteman said. "But if it lands in a place in the genome that's near some enhancer or some regulatory component that expresses it a little bit in fat body tissue, then you can see how it can get this leg up really quickly, you get this amazing advantage." Horizontal gene transfer in any organism would pose similar problems, he said, but in the arms race between predator and prey, it may be worth it. "When you're a poor little fruit fly, how do you deal with these pathogens and parasites that are rapidly evolving to take advantage of you?" he said. "One way is to borrow genes from bacteria and viruses because they're rapidly evolving. It's an ingenious strategy -- instead of waiting around for your own genes to help you, take them from other organisms that are more rapidly evolving than themselves. And that seems to have happened many times independently in insects, given that so many different ones have taken up this gene. It gives us a picture of a new kind of dynamism that is occurring even in animals that have just innate immune systems and don't have adaptive immunity." Whiteman's work was funded by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health (R35GM119816). Other co-authors of the paper are Josephine Tamsil, Ji Heon Ha, Kirsten Verster and Susan Bernstein of UC Berkeley, Gyöngyi Cinege, Edit Ábrahám, Lilla B. Magyar and Zoltán Lipinszki of Hungary and Bernard Kim of Stanford University.

How do lice tolerate this genome structure that in humans and many other animals would result in major neurodegenerative problems? "We're a long way from connecting those dots," said Stephen Cameron, professor of entomology at Purdue University. Parkinson's and Alzheimer's are aging-related mitochondrial diseases, so called because of the malfunctioning mitochondria that produce cellular energy. "If animals develop a neurological disorder too early in life, they're not going to have offspring," Cameron said. "Lice seem to have it from when they hatch. They're clearly handling it and have handled it for 50 million years." The last decade has seen a flood of mitochondrial genomics data on lice and other insects. This data bolsters studies related to properly identifying and classifying insect species and developing insecticides that act on the mitochondria. Lice, meanwhile, offer a model for studying the impact of evolution on neurodegenerative disease. The number of sequenced insect mitochondrial genomes has increased by 876% since 2014, while the total species diversity count has increased by 790%. Cameron's article "Insect Mitochondrial Genomics: A Decade of Progress," appeared in the Annual Review of Entomology . He published a similar article in 2014. The mitochondria help organisms process oxygen and food, which are subject to natural selection. "And yet we have stunningly few examples of studies that actually take that into account," Cameron said. The sequencing technologies used today were just becoming available in 2014. Since then, technologies have improved while cost has plummeted. Cameron sequenced his first genome in 2002. The task took six months of daily lab work and cost $4,000. "For that money I could now do hundreds," he said. "Genetic-scale sequencing these days is just ludicrously efficient." Today, Cameron's graduate students do more genomic analysis in a week than he did in two years working as a postdoctoral researcher. Cameron broadly compared the geometric rate of increase to Moore's Law, the idea that the number of transistors on a computer chip doubles about every two years. His new review article identified genomic fragmentation and control region duplication as currently important research topics. Entomologists see genomic fragmentation, the breakdown of DNA into smaller pieces, as a model system to study neurological disease states. "It's rare. Anything that's rare makes you wonder why," Cameron noted. "Typically, when things are all one way, it's because evolution has it in a box. It's constrained. So, why is this constraint against fragmented genomes being released in the case of lice?" Some evidence suggests that in extreme cases, fragmentation might benefit small, inbred populations by allowing an organism to purge harmful forms of its mitochondrial genome. This may apply to lice, which consist of small, inbred populations. Cameron is conducting research both on fragmentation in lice and on the duplication of genetic control regions in a type of winged insect called thrips. Small and difficult to identify, thrips sometimes bloom into large infestations that plague greenhouses and field crops. Molecular diagnostics can help identify the pest, but changes in its mitochondrial genome make this more difficult in thrips than in other insect types. "We're trying to work up some better methods that allow us to more reliably use DNA-based species delimitation, which can then be used for quarantine services to keep pests out of America or other areas," he said. Mitochondrial genome studies also can contribute to pest control methods that act by modifying insect metabolism. "Most pesticides are neurotoxins, so they don't immediately interact with the mitochondria." Insect identification has both scientific and economic implications. Nearly all insect identifications that use molecular data are performed using a mitochondrial DNA method. In the 1990s and early 2000s, South American fruit flies that managed to elude early detection and identification jumped into commercial fruits. That could happen again with new agricultural areas joining the global production system. Agricultural biosecurity can predictively benefit from a better genomic understanding of insect pests, Cameron noted. Doing such work now parallels the coronavirus research that followed the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak 20 years ago. Once the COVID-19 pandemic broke out in 2020, biomedical researchers were able to respond swiftly. He also highlighted an emerging body of research on the effects of extreme environments, such as high altitudes and desert conditions, on insect genomes. The results could then be applied to various methods designed to control their populations. "It's good to know what their biology would allow them to evolve toward, to understand the escape hatches that evolution provides for them," he said. "And, with climate change, those aspects contribute to our understanding of how beneficial insects might respond to changing environments."

The research team studied several colonies of two soft coral species, Callogorgia delta and Callogorgia Americana , which are found in the Gulf of Mexico at depths ranging from 300 to 900 metres, where it is completely dark. The researchers discovered two previously unknown, closely related species from the mollicutes class of bacteria. Mollicutes often live as parasites either on or in the cells of plants, animals and humans, and in some cases cause diseases. On the basis of their genetic analyses, the researchers propose a new family called Oceanoplasmataceae, to which the two bacteria are to be assigned. Further investigations revealed that the bacteria are the dominant symbionts of these corals and live in a gelatinous layer of tissue that forms part of their immune defence system and transports nutrients. One of the species ( Oceanoplasma callogorgiae ) contains only 359 genes which encode proteins for various metabolic functions. The other ( Thalassoplasma callogorgiae ) has 385 protein-coding genes. By comparison, the intestinal bacterium Escherichia coli contains more than 4,000 such genes, while humans have around 21,000 of them. Amino acid is their only source of energy The question of how the metabolism of the two newly discovered microbes can function with such a reduced genome remains a mystery to the researchers: "These bacteria don't even carry genes for normal carbohydrate metabolism, in other words, for obtaining energy from carbohydrates -- something that basically every living organism has," Baums explains. According to the research to date, their only source of energy is the amino acid arginine, which is provided by the host coral. "But the breakdown of this amino acid provides only tiny amounts of energy. It is astonishing that the bacteria can survive on so little," says Vohsen. The bacteria also obtain other essential nutrients from their host. It remains unclear whether the microbes are purely parasites, or whether the corals benefit in some way from their symbionts. According to the scientists' genetic analysis, the two bacterial species use various defence mechanisms called CRISPR/Cas systems to remove foreign DNA. These systems are also used in biotechnology to edit genes. The researchers hypothesise that these mechanisms may also be useful to the host corals, helping them to fend off pathogens. Another possibility is that the bacteria provide nitrogen to their host when they break down arginine. For Baums, whose research focuses on both the ecology and evolution of corals, the symbionts offer an opportunity to gain further insights into the history of this diverse group of animals. "I always find it amazing that corals can colonise so many different habitats despite being very simple animals in terms of their genetic blueprint," says the researcher. Symbionts are crucial for the ability of corals to adapt to different environmental conditions, she explains: "They provide metabolic functions that the corals themselves lack." For example, tropical corals, which live in shallow, light-flooded waters, rely on photosynthetic algae to provide them with food and energy. Cold-water corals, many of which live in the dark and nutrient-poor deep sea, are thought to rely on bacteria to convert nutrients or obtain energy from chemical compounds. Baums, an evolutionary ecologist and coral expert, conducts research at the Helmholtz Institute for Functional Marine Biodiversity at the University of Oldenburg (HIFMB) and holds a joint professorship at the University of Oldenburg and the Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research in Bremerhaven. In addition to Professor Baums and Dr Vohsen, scientists from the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology in Bremen, Kiel University and Pennsylvania State University in the US were also involved in the current study.

But it turns out that CRISPR systems have more than one strategy in their toolkit. A mechanism originally discovered in bacteria, where it has operated as an adaptive immune system for eons, CRISPR is naturally deployed by certain singled-cell organisms to protect themselves against viruses (called phages) and other foreign genetic fragments. Now, researchers at Rockefeller's Laboratory of Bacteriology headed by Luciano Marraffini, and at the MSKCC's Structural Biology Laboratory headed by Dinshaw Patel, have discovered how one CRISPR system battles invaders with not only genetic scissors but also acts as a sort of molecular fumigator. In a recent publication in Cell , the scientists found that this system, called CRISPR-Cas10, floods a virally infected bacterium with toxic molecules, and thus prevents the virus from spreading through the rest of the bacterial population. "It's a completely brand-new type of CRISPR chemistry," says co-first author Christian Baca, a TPCB graduate student in the Marraffini lab. "It's more evidence that CRISPR systems have an array of immune strategies at their disposal." Cell shutdown There are six types of CRISPR ("clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats") systems; CRISPR-Cas9, for example, is type II, with the enzyme Cas9 functioning as the DNA scissors. For the current study, the researchers looked at a type III system called CRISPR-Cas10. In both systems, guide RNAs identify problematic genetic material, and the enzymes begin snipping. However, the CRISPR-Cas10 complex also produces a burst of small second messenger molecules called cyclic-oligoadenylates (cOAs), which helps shut down cell activity, thereby preventing the virus from spreading. This second line of attack is akin to fumigating one pest-ridden room, and then quickly shutting the door to keep the infestation contained so it can't spread to the rest of the house. This two-part response is largely a matter of timing, says Baca. "Cas10 alone can clear a phage or plasmid from a cell as long as the target transcript that's been recognized by the guide RNA is made early in the viral infection. But if the problematic snippet is something only made at a later stage of the infection, these cOA molecules are essential for defense," he says. "In this way, type III CRISPR systems work similarly to mammalian innate immunity pathways, such as cGAS-STING, that produce cyclic nucleotides to activate a host response," adds Marraffini. While that much was known, the molecular dynamics behind how, exactly, a new Type III CRISPR protein, CRISPR-associated adenosine deaminase 1 (Cad1) achieves cell shut down was not. A toxic plume To find out, the researchers undertook a detailed molecular and structural analysis of Cad1, using cryo-EM and other advanced approaches to reveal unusual structures and dynamics that explain how the system pauses cell activity. In the CRISPR-Cas10 system, Cad1 is alerted to the presence of a virus by the binding of cOAs to a part of the protein called the CARF domain. That in turn stimulates Cad1 to convert ATP (the energy currency of the cell) into ITP (an intermediary nucleotide that usually is present in the cell in small amounts), which then floods the cell. ITP turns toxic to cells in high doses, so as a result, cellular activity comes to a halt, putting the cell in a dormant state. "The infected cell is sacrificed when the virus is sequestered within it, but the larger bacterial population is protected," says co-first author Puja Majumder, a postdoctoral research scholar at the Patel Lab. Why it has this impact is unclear. One theory is that excess ITP competes for binding sites typically occupied by ATP or GTP in proteins that are critical for normal cellular function; another is that high levels of ITP interfere with phage DNA replication. "But we don't really know why yet," Majumder says. One potential application of their discovery is as a diagnostic tool for infection, Baca notes. "The presence of ITP would indicate that a pathogen transcript is present in a sample."

While there is substantial research into developing interventions to repair injured tissue, scientists at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis focused instead on developing, in mice, an immunotherapy to minimize the damage from traumatic spinal cord injury. Their findings show that immunotherapy can lessen such damage by protecting neurons at the injury site from being attacked by immune cells. The study, published Sept. 4 in Nature, demonstrates success in mice given the immunotherapy and presents a novel approach with potential to help improve outcomes for people recovering from spinal cord injuries. "Immune cells in the central nervous system have a reputation for being the bad guys that can harm the brain and spinal cord," said senior author Jonathan Kipnis, PhD, the Alan A. and Edith L. Wolff Distinguished Professor of Pathology & Immunology and a BJC Investigator at WashU Medicine. "But our study shows that it's possible to take advantage of immune cells' neuroprotective function, while controlling their inherent detrimental abilities, to help in the recovery from central nervous system injury." Shortly after injury to the nervous system, immune cells flood the site. Among them is a mixture of activated T cells -- a subset of immune cells -- that either harm or protect the surrounding neurons. Wenqing Gao, PhD, a postdoctoral research associate in the Department of Pathology & Immunology and the study's first author, analyzed T cells from the spinal cords of injured mice and performed a genetic analysis to decode their identities. Her goal was to separate the harmful from the protective T cells and create numerous copies of the beneficial cells with which to treat the injured mice. But there was a catch, she found. The protective T cells that swoop into the injury site can mistakenly attack the body's surrounding tissues when activated for too long, causing autoimmune disease. To improve the therapy's safety, Gao modified the cells to shut off after a few days. Mice given the modified T cells had better mobility than did the untreated mice. The researchers saw the biggest improvements when the mice were infused with T cells within a week of the injury. None of the mice receiving immunotherapy developed a destructive autoimmune reaction. "There are no effective treatments for traumatic injuries to the central nervous system," explained Gao. "We developed immunotherapy for such injuries by taking advantage of the protective immune cells that infiltrate the injury site and found that it dramatically improved mobility in mice." In collaboration with WashU Medicine's Wilson Zachary Ray, MD, a spinal cord surgeon and the Henry G. & Edith R. Schwartz Professor of Neurosurgery, the researchers also looked every day for a week for T cells in the cerebral spinal fluid of patients with spinal cord injuries. They found a significant expansion of the T cells, confirming the feasibility of expanding protective T cells from such patients to generate the immunotherapy. "Our future goal is to devise a clinical trial to test the therapy in people with such injuries, while expanding this work to neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) as well as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases," Gao said. Added Kipnis: "Although the initial trigger in neurodegenerative diseases is different, the subsequent death of neurons may very well be mediated by similar processes, opening an opportunity for adapting our engineered cells for use as a therapy in neurodegeneration." This work was supported by the BJC Investigators Program at WashU.

In all likelihood, life on Earth began in water, perhaps in a tide pool that was cut off from seawater at low tide but flooded by waves at high tide. Over billions of years, complex molecules like DNA, RNA and proteins formed in this setting before, ultimately, the first cells emerged. To date, however, nobody has been able to explain exactly how this happened. "We know which molecules existed on the early earth," says Job Boekhoven, Professor of Supramolecular Chemistry at the Technical University of Munich (TUM). "The question is: Can we use this to replicate the origins of life in the lab?" The team led by Boekhoven at the ORIGINS Cluster of Excellence is primarily interested in RNA. "RNA is a fascinating molecule," says Boekhoven. "It can store information and also catalyze biochemical reactions." Scientists therefore believe that RNA must have been the first of all complex molecules to form. The problem, however, is that active RNA molecules are composed of hundreds or even thousands of bases and are very unstable. When immersed in water, RNA strands quickly break down into their constituent parts -- a process known as hydrolysis. So, how could RNA have survived in the primordial soup? How did double strands form in the primordial soup? In laboratory testing, the researchers from TUM and LMU used a model system of RNA bases that join together more easily than naturally occurring bases in our cells today. "We didn't have millions of years available and wanted an answer quickly," explains Boekhoven. The team added these fast-joining RNA bases into a watery solution, provided an energy source and examined the length of the RNA molecules that formed. Their findings were sobering, as the resulting strands of up to five base pairs only survived for a matter of minutes. The results were different, however, when the researchers started by adding short strands of pre-formed RNA. The free complementary bases quickly joined with this RNA in a process called hybridization. Double strands of three to five base pairs in length formed and remained stable for several hours. "The exciting part is that double strands lead to RNA folding, which can make the RNA catalytically active," explains Boekhoven. Double-stranded RNA therefore has two advantages: it has an extended lifespan in the primordial soup and serves as the basis for catalytically active RNA. But how could a double strand have formed in the primordial soup? "We're currently exploring whether it's possible for RNAs to form their own complementary strand," says Boekhoven. It is conceivable for a molecule comprising three bases to join with a molecule comprising three complementary bases -- the product of which would be a stable double-strand. Thanks to its prolonged lifespan, further bases could join with it and the strand would grow. Evolutionary advantage for protocells Another characteristic of double-stranded RNA could have helped bring about the origin of life. It is firstly important to note that RNA molecules can also form protocells. These are tiny droplets with an interior fully separated from the outside world. Yet, these protocells do not have a stable cell membrane and so easily merge with other protocells, which causes their contents to mix. This is not conducive to evolution because it prevents individual protocells from developing a unique identity. However, if the borders of these protocells are composed of double-stranded DNA, the cells become more stable and merging is inhibited. Insights also applicable to medicine In the future, Job Boekhoven hopes to further improve understanding of the formation and stabilization of the first RNA molecules. "Some people regard this research as a sort of hobby. During the Covid-19 pandemic, though, everyone saw how important RNA molecules can be, including for vaccines," says Boekhoven. "So, while our research is striving to answer one of the oldest questions in science, that's not all: we're also generating knowledge about RNA that could benefit many people today."

The study, recently published in the journal Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution , suggests that the genetic variation of two species, the Brazilian sibilator frog and the granular toad, both amphibians native to northeastern Brazil, were shaped by different processes. Results showed that the genetic variation in the sibilator frog was shaped mostly by population demographic events in response to habitat changes that occurred over the last 100,000 years. In contrast, genetic diversity in the granular toad was mostly shaped by contemporary landscape factors -- toads that are relatively more isolated, either by geographic distance or inhospitable habitat, were more likely to be genetically different. While previous investigations have explored the effects of historical demographic and landscape factors on genetic diversity of these amphibians, they were conducted with separate sets of data for these factors, making it difficult to discern which was the most important. Now, researchers involved with this paper are the first to use artificial intelligence to consider how both processes shape genetic diversity equally, rather than making manual assumptions about which may have been more vital. "Prior to this work, we had to ask questions independently because you couldn't investigate both influences in the same framework," said Bryan Carstens, co-author of the study and a professor in evolution, ecology and organismal biology at The Ohio State University. "What AI allows us to do is to simulate processes that are both happening ecologically in the present and during deep-time evolutionary events and compare those findings to the actual data that we collect from these frogs." Due to the sheer amount of data that's become available to geneticists and other wildlife biologists over the past few decades, it can be challenging for researchers to identify specific factors that might be important in certain experiments, said Carstens. But by integrating large swaths of information into simulations that can account for those elements in a single analysis, it's possible to get a much more complete chronicle of a species' development. "It takes a long time to build and train our AI models, but we wanted one l that could capture the range of potential variation in the species' histories in a way that was as faithful as we could be to what we knew about the biology of the system," said Carstens. For example, while the species this study investigated dwell in the same region, there are many differences in their natural histories. Despite both their eggs and larvae being fully aquatic, the sibulator frog reproduces continuously throughout the wet season and in underground chambers, while the granular toad's reproductive events happen explosively because they are dependent on heavy rainfall. Combined with their machine learning approach, the researchers' simulation determined their model scenarios were 100% supported regarding historical explanations for the sibilator frog's expansion, and over 99% supported for those of the granular toad. One of the reasons their model is so accurate is due to its ability to account for recent demographic events, including measuring how events like human development or habitat change may have affected animal genetic diversity over a long period of time. But even when using AI, researchers have to be careful to avoid deceptive patterns in their results, said Carstens. "No analysis that we do is going to capture every single factor that has been important to these species over millions of years," he said. "So we have to allow for a range of possibilities without making it so broad that essentially any model would be able to fit the data." That said, as technological strides allow researchers to answer niche ecological questions and test new hypotheses, their work is a precursor to creating an upgraded machine learning framework that could be applied to unique investigations of other species, said Carstens. "We're likely to continue using different combinations of these AI tools in different ways to try to understand evolutionary history," said Carstens. "And as we keep learning, the tools we're using will change, and they'll evolve to be even better." Emanuel M. Fonseca, who earned his doctorate from Ohio State in 2022, was a co-author. The study was supported by the Ohio Supercomputer Center, the U.S. National Science Foundation and the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior in Brazil.

The stranded seaweed blocks fishing boats; threatens tourism; disrupts turtle nesting sites, reefs and mangroves, and releases toxic gas, which impacts human health and damages electrical equipment. First reported by Christopher Columbus in the 15th century, floating mats of sargassum have long been present in the North Atlantic. However, since 2011, a floating population has established between West Africa and South America, and increased in size to form "the great Atlantic sargassum belt" -- a 9,000km-long macroalgal bloom, visible from space and estimated to weigh 35 million tons. The massive blooms of sargassum are thought to be down to nutrient pollution and warming seas, and vast quantities of the seaweed end up in landfill each year. The research team, from the Universities of York and Southampton, alongside colleagues from the University of the West Indies in Jamaica and Barbados, set out to learn more about sargassum's biomass composition in order to unlock its potential to be used to produce sustainable products. While the seaweed is an abundant biomass, its possible uses are limited due to its high arsenic content. First author of the study Dr Carla Machado, a research associate in the Department of Biology, said: "The small quantities of sargassum that used to wash ashore in the Caribbean provided a habitat for turtles, crabs and fish and contributed to beach formation as it decomposed, but the vast sargassum blooms of the past decade are a global problem that will continue to grow and have a major impact in the affected countries. This research project has brought together international researchers specialising in biomass composition and satellite imaging to track, sample and study sargassum, providing crucial new knowledge of this little-understood macroalgae." For a biomass to be utilised, it needs to be consistent in its composition; this ensures it can be processed efficiently and behave predictably during production. The results of the study showed that, overall, the biochemical composition of sargassum is consistent throughout the year. The researchers tested different processing methods for the seaweed, including shade-drying or freezing, and found the protein content of the seaweed stayed the same. However, the method of processing did affect levels of other components such as alginate, which can be processed for many applications, including biomaterials. The researchers collected samples of sargassum in Jamaica throughout 2021, which coincided with the April 2021 eruption of La Soufrière on the Caribbean island of Saint Vincent. Using drift patterns, the authors calculated that the sargassum samples they collected in August 2021 would have spent approximately 50 days exposed to ash from the eruption. They found that seaweed that had likely been in contact with volcanic ash contained less arsenic, but had accumulated other elements including nickel and zinc. Lead author of the study, Dr Thierry Tonon from the Department of Biology at the University of York said: "Understanding sargassum's response to environmental conditions is crucial for unlocking its biology and potential value. "With the great sargassum belt also receiving additional nutrients from Sahara dust that blows across the Atlantic, huge quantities of the seaweed washing up on coastlines looks set to become the new normal." There is much more work to be done to increase understanding about sargassum and how it is going to behave in years to come, the researchers say. This will provide a body of evidence that could inform an international response to the problems it poses to people and the environment and transform it into something useful. Professor Robert Marsh from the University of Southampton said: "The sargassum beaching around Jamaica in late summer 2021 carried distinct traces of the volcanic ash that settled upon it around 4 months earlier, just to the east of St Vincent; this novel 'volcanic tag' confirmed that sargassum arrives each summer at Jamaican beaches after a months-long journey drifting with currents from the central tropical Atlantic." Professor Hazel A. Oxenford from the University of the West Indies said: "Volcanic ash collected in my garden from the St Vincent eruption was used to determine its chemical signature. Being able to detect those components in sargassum after it travelled more than 1,700 km across the Caribbean to Jamaica was exciting. It confirmed our predicted transport pathway for sargassum, showed that the seaweed lives for at least 4 months and demonstrates the marine connectivity across the region." Professor Mona Webber from the University of the West Indies added: "It is very important for Caribbean Islands being affected by the sargassum inundation to be able to benefit from its valorization. Understanding how the sargassum we collect in Jamaica has changed en route to our shores and factors that could affect especially the arsenic content, will propel us towards safe use of the algal biomass."

"If you frame it as an either/or question, it's too simplistic," says Utah State University evolutionary biologist Zachariah Gompert. "The answer isn't 'completely random' or 'completely deterministic and predictable.' And yet, examining short time scales, we can find predictable, repeatable evolutionary patterns." Gompert and colleagues report evidence of repeatable evolution in populations of stick insects in the May 24, 2024, online edition of the American Association for the Advancement of Science's journal Science Advances . Collaborating authors on the paper include Gompert's long-time collaborator Patrik Nosil and other researchers from France's University of Montpelier, Brazil's Federal University of São Paulo, the University of Nevada, Reno and Notre Dame University. The research is supported by the National Science Foundation and the European Research Council. The team examined three decades of data on the frequency of cryptic color-pattern morphs in the stick insect species Timema cristinae in ten naturally replicate populations in California. T. cristinae is polymorphic in regard to its body color and pattern. Some insects are green, which allows the wingless, plant-feeding insect to blend in with California lilac ( Ceanothus spinosus ) shrubs. In contrast, green striped morphs disappear against chamise ( Adenostoma fasciculatum ) shrubs. Hiding amongst the plants is one of T. christinae's key defenses as hungry birds, such as scrub jays, are insatiable predators of the stick insects. "Bird predation is a constant driver shaping the insects' organismal traits, including coloration and striped vs. non-striped," says Gompert, associate professor in USU's Department of Biology and the USU Ecology Center. "We observed predictable 'up-and-down' fluctuations in stripe frequency in all populations, representing repeatable evolutionary dynamics based on standing genetic variation." He says a field experiment demonstrates these fluctuations involved negative frequency-dependent natural selection (NFDS), where cryptic color patterns are more beneficial when rare rather than common. This is likely because birds develop a 'search image' for very abundant prey. "At short time scales, evolution involving existing variations can be quite predictable," says Gompert, who received a National Science Foundation CAREER grant in 2019 to support his research. "You can count on certain drivers always being there, such as birds feeding on the insects." But at longer time scales, evolutionary dynamics become less predictable. "The populations might experience a chance event, such as a severe drought or a flooding event, that disrupts the status quo and thus, the predictable outcomes," Gompert says. On long time scales, a new mutation in the species could introduce a rare trait, he says. "That's about as close to truly random as you can get." "Rare things are easily lost by chance, so there's a strong probability a new mutation could disappear before it gains a stronghold," he says. "Indeed, another species of Timema stick insect that also feeds on chamise either never had or quickly lost the mutations making the cryptic stripe trait. Thus, the evolution of stripe is not a repeatable outcome of evolution at this long scale." Gompert notes replicated, long-term studies from natural populations, including research on the famous Darwin's finches, are rare. "Because most of this work is restricted to one or few populations, it is difficult to draw inferences on repeatability among multiple evolutionary independent populations," he says. "Such studies are challenging to implement not only because they take concerted effort, but also because you can't rush time." Gompert, who is designated a High Ranked Scholar by ScholarGPS, has developed, with USU colleagues, a research-intensive, interactive introductory biology laboratory class to introduce undergraduates to research. He and colleagues also developed an interactive presentation about evolution for all ages, called "Nabokov's Butterflies," that was presented at the USU College of Science's Science Unwrapped public outreach program in 2022.

Scarring occurs from the secretion and accumulation of various components -- primarily proteins known as collagens -- into the space between individual cells, usually occurring as a response to injury or damage. Excessive collagen secretion can also cause the buildup of fibrotic tissue, a more serious condition where excess connective tissue is formed to the extent that it compromises the function of tissues and sometimes entire organs. Around 45% of deaths in the industrialised world are attributed to some form of tissue fibrosis. Treatment options for both scarring and fibrosis are usually limited to surgery. Outside the body, scar tissue is often beneath the outer layer of the skin. Since most topical creams are not able to penetrate deeply enough to reach the affected areas effectively, their ability to remodel or heal the tissue is limited. Inside the body, scarring and fibrosis can affect many different tissues and organs, each with its unique environment and challenges and with no one-size-fits-all treatment option. "Existing treatment options are usually ineffective because they try and fail to mop the excessive collagen up. In this work, we tried a completely different idea: to block the floodgates at the cellular level. The strategy works at the cellular level, releasing enough collagen so that tissues don't fall apart while protecting them from excessive amounts that impairs their function," explains ICREA Research Professor Vivek Malhotra, co-corresponding author of the study and researcher at the Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) in Barcelona, Spain. The researchers' new strategy involves using molecules known as peptides to block the export of collagen from inside cells. The peptides disrupt an interaction between two proteins called TANGO1 and cTAGE5. Both proteins bind to each other and are essential for the export of collagens from their site of synthesis inside the cell to the exterior. The two proteins "sit" at the endoplasmic reticulum exit site, a place in the cell where materials like proteins are packaged and transported out the cell. "Targeting the endoplasmic reticulum exit site has been historically considered impossible because a third of all human proteins go through it, so inhibiting its activity would likely have many off-target, toxic effects. In other words, it's been 'undruggable'. Only recently have there been indications that there is some specificity for the secretory materials. In this study we aimed to achieve this specificity by inhibiting the interface between TANGO1 and cTAGE5 with targeted precision," explains Dr. Ishier Raote, first author of the study who carried out the work at the Centre for Genomic Regulation. Proteins are like puzzle pieces. To know how two pieces fit together, you need to see their shapes clearly. Both TANGO1 and cTAGE5 are large, complex proteins which constantly shapeshift. To date, their exact structure remains unknown, which in turn means we don't understand how they connect at the molecular level, hindering efforts to design drugs that can block the interaction. The researchers overcame this challenge by using AlphaFold2, an artificial-intelligence program that can guess the shapes of the two proteins without needing structural data about their 3D shape. The predictions made by AI allowed the authors of the study to design peptides which can pass through a cell membrane and disrupt the interaction between TANGO1 and cTAGE5. The researchers tested the peptides using normal human fibroblasts, the most common type of cell found in connective tissue. The peptides successfully inhibited collagen export, causing it to accumulate inside the cells. The effect was also reversible, with collagen levels increasing again after the peptides were removed within a 48-hour period. The researchers observed similar effects in experiments with fibroblasts from patients with scleroderma, a complex autoimmune disease characterized by fibrosis of the skin and internal organs. The peptides were then tested using zebrafish, a common animal model to study tissue development and wound healing. The strategy visibly reduced collagen deposition in wound areas. The researchers next plan to evaluate the efficacy of the peptides in pig skin because it closely resembles human skin. They will also finetune the properties of the peptides to increase their potency. "We believe this represents a new strategy to control the effects of collagen hypersecretion. This could range from alleviating the cosmetic effects of skin scarring to the treatment of autoimmune diseases like scleroderma, as well as to manipulate post-surgery related events associated with wound healing to prevent fibrosis," concludes Dr. Malhotra. The study was coordinated by researchers at the Centre for Genomic Regulation in Spain and the University of Cologne in Germany. It also includes collaborators from the Institut Jacques Monod in France, EMBL Barcelona, the Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine (inStem) in India, ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques in Spain, and the Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging in Germany.

The data, described in Nature Publishing Group's Scientific Data , provides in-depth information on 27 genetically distinct variants, or genotypes, of Populus trichocarpa , a poplar tree of interest as a bioenergy crop. The genotypes are among those that the ORNL-led Center for Bioenergy Innovation previously included in a genome-wide association study linking genetic variations to the trees' physical traits. ORNL researchers collected leaf, soil and root samples from poplar fields in two regions of Oregon -- one in a wetter area subject to flooding and the other drier and susceptible to drought. Details in the newly integrated dataset range from the trees' genetic makeup and gene expression to the chemistry of the soil environment, analysis of the microbes that live on and around the trees and compounds the plants and microbes produce. The dataset "is unprecedented in its size and scope," said ORNL Corporate Fellow Mitchel Doktycz, section head for Bioimaging and Analytics and project co-lead. "It is of value in answering many different scientific questions." By mining the data with machine learning and statistical approaches, scientists can better understand how the genetic makeup, physical traits and chemical diversity of Populus relate to processes such as cycling of soil nitrogen and carbon, he said. "The knowledge we generated from this one plant will be folded back into projects that produce biofuels from poplar," said Melanie Mayes, leader of ORNL's Ecosystem Processes group and a collaborator on the project. "The procedure we built here will be needed for bioengineering of other plants, and to help us build climate resilience -- to advance soil carbon storage and reduce greenhouse gas emissions." The complete dataset comprises more than 25 terabytes. Links to the data are available as part of the National Microbiome Data Collaborative, or NMDC, a DOE initiative supporting data-sharing on the association of microbiomes with environmental processes. "The dataset represents the largest publicly available metagenomics repository on a tree endosphere," the plant tissue environment that is home to complex microbial communities, said Christopher Schadt, project co-lead and ORNL distinguished staff scientist. Detailed analyses of the samples resulted in 318 metagenomes, revealing the diversity of microbes living in and around trees through genetic sequencing. Ninety-eight plant transcriptomes provide information on the full range of messenger RNA molecules expressed in the plant roots. The dataset includes 314 metabolomic profiles, supplying information on the small molecules produced by plants and microbes as they grow or in response to stress. Data are also included on associated soil physical and biogeochemical characteristics, examining chemicals present and how they cycle through the environment. Integrating this "multi-omics" data will provide essential information to scientists studying how plant-related molecular and cellular events are connected to ecosystem processes and behaviors. Understanding plant, soil nitrogen cycling triggers The Joint Genome Institute, a DOE Office of Science user facility at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, was a close collaborator on the project. JGI led the metabolomics profiling of the leaf, root and soil environment, or rhizosphere, the plant root transcriptomics sequencing, and the soil rhizosphere and endosphere metagenomics work. "The combination of metagenomics and metabolomics from leaf, root and soils, along with Populus host transcriptomes, make this a truly unique dataset for the research community and could serve as a central data resource to explore plant-microbe interactions," said Emiley Eloe-Fadrosh, Metagenome Program head at JGI. The project began as an ORNL pilot called Bio-Scales, supported by the Biological Systems Science Division in the DOE Office of Science's Biological and Environmental Research program. Bio-Scales pursues a better understanding of the plant-microbe relationship with a focus on nitrogen cycling. Nitrogen is an essential nutrient for life, but when overused in agriculture and other applications it can harm water quality or be emitted as the potent greenhouse gas nitrous oxide, or N2O. "The project required the integration of a lot of diverse expertise," Doktycz said. "It started with a team who went out in the midst of COVID-19 to collect all these diverse materials and got them back to the lab, then prepared, analyzed and extracted data from them. We also had an incredible technical support team who processed hundreds of these samples in a tracked and coordinated way, interfacing with the Joint Genome Institute for the sequence analysis." In addition to its size and scope, the dataset stands out as being heavily annotated with metadata -- with precise details, for instance, on where and how the sampling took place and a standard format for subsequent data reporting. Adding those elements to data makes information easier to find, understand and reuse. ORNL's Stanton Martin, who led data management for the project in close coordination with the NMDC, noted that the data-first approach supports artificial intelligence and other analytical approaches to help resolve scientific questions. "The data management we performed on this project is hugely valuable to data practices for other projects like the Plant-Microbe Interfaces Scientific Focus Area and the Center for Bioenergy Innovation at ORNL. It plays to ORNL's strengths in what I call data management's three V's -- data volume, variety and velocity -- and allowed us to take a first step in integrating very large 'omics data in a way that has not been done before." The project started with Schadt and Mayes traveling to Oregon for sampling. "It normally would have been six scientists, but we had travel restrictions on groups traveling together due to the pandemic," Schadt said. They also had to work around encroaching wildfires, as Oregon experienced an active fire season that year. Schadt and Mayes worked with the assistance of Oregon State University volunteers to gather extensive geotagged samples at the two sites. Beneficial bioengineering Mayes said the project "gets at the role of genes in influencing not just the fate of the plant itself, but also the environment around it, such as the soil. For instance, we wanted to understand the potential of soil microbes to either make more nitrate or to remove excess nitrate from the system. We wanted to learn more about how plant genomics influence what soil microbes are doing." Knowing more about the plant and soil nitrogen cycle can affect emissions of N2O, a gas that accounts for 6% of all greenhouse gas emissions in the United States. "If you know which genes to target that result in the minimization of N2O or nitrate production, then you have the potential to affect both greenhouse gas-related warming and water quality," Mayes said. "You could, for instance, select and further bioengineer plants with the best genetic profile for controlling these emissions." "This project is unique because it gets at the connection between plant genomes and environmental outcomes like nitrous oxide emissions or nitrate production," Mayes said. "Building one of the first, comprehensive datasets on the plant-microbe relationship also tells us how much we still can learn."

An MIT team is now hoping to fortify coastlines with "architected" reefs -- sustainable, offshore structures engineered to mimic the wave-buffering effects of natural reefs while also providing pockets for fish and other marine life. The team's reef design centers on a cylindrical structure surrounded by four rudder-like slats. The engineers found that when this structure stands up against a wave, it efficiently breaks the wave into turbulent jets that ultimately dissipate most of the wave's total energy. The team has calculated that the new design could reduce as much wave energy as existing artificial reefs, using 10 times less material. The researchers plan to fabricate each cylindrical structure from sustainable cement, which they would mold in a pattern of "voxels" that could be automatically assembled, and would provide pockets for fish to explore and other marine life to settle in. The cylinders could be connected to form a long, semipermeable wall, which the engineers could erect along a coastline, about half a mile from shore. Based on the team's initial experiments with lab-scale prototypes, the architected reef could reduce the energy of incoming waves by more than 95 percent. "This would be like a long wave-breaker," says Michael Triantafyllou, the Henry L. and Grace Doherty Professor in Ocean Science and Engineering in the Department of Mechanical Engineering. "If waves are 6 meters high coming toward this reef structure, they would be ultimately less than a meter high on the other side. So, this kills the impact of the waves, which could prevent erosion and flooding." Details of the architected reef design are reported today in a study appearing in the open-access journal PNAS Nexus . Triantafyllou's MIT co-authors are Edvard Ronglan SM '23; graduate students Alfonso Parra Rubio, Jose del Auila Ferrandis, and Erik Strand; research scientists Patricia Maria Stathatou and Carolina Bastidas; and Professor Neil Gershenfeld, director of the Center for Bits and Atoms; along with Alexis Oliveira Da Silva at the Polytechnic Institute of Paris, Dixia Fan of Westlake University, and Jeffrey Gair Jr. of Scinetics, Inc. Leveraging turbulence Some regions have already erected artificial reefs to protect their coastlines from encroaching storms. These structures are typically sunken ships, retired oil and gas platforms, and even assembled configurations of concrete, metal, tires, and stones. However, there's variability in the types of artificial reefs that are currently in place, and no standard for engineering such structures. What's more, the designs that are deployed tend to have a low wave dissipation per unit volume of material used. That is, it takes a huge amount of material to break enough wave energy to adequately protect coastal communities. The MIT team instead looked for ways to engineer an artificial reef that would efficiently dissipate wave energy with less material, while also providing a refuge for fish living along any vulnerable coast. "Remember, natural coral reefs are only found in tropical waters," says Triantafyllou, who is director of the MIT Sea Grant. "We cannot have these reefs, for instance, in Massachusetts. But architected reefs don't depend on temperature, so they can be placed in any water, to protect more coastal areas." The new effort is the result of a collaboration between researchers in MIT Sea Grant, who developed the reef structure's hydrodynamic design, and researchers at the Center for Bits and Atoms (CBA), who worked to make the structure modular and easy to fabricate on location. The team's architected reef design grew out of two seemingly unrelated problems. CBA researchers were developing ultralight cellular structures for the aerospace industry, while Sea Grant researchers were assessing the performance of blowout preventers in offshore oil structures -- cylindrical valves that are used to seal off oil and gas wells and prevent them from leaking. The team's tests showed that the structure's cylindrical arrangement generated a high amount of drag. In other words, the structure appeared to be especially efficient in dissipating high-force flows of oil and gas. They wondered: Could the same arrangement dissipate another type of flow, in ocean waves? The researchers began to play with the general structure in simulations of water flow, tweaking its dimensions and adding certain elements to see whether and how waves changed as they crashed against each simulated design. This iterative process ultimately landed on an optimized geometry: a vertical cylinder flanked by four long slats, each attached to the cylinder in a way that leaves space for water to flow through the resulting structure. They found this setup essentially breaks up any incoming wave energy, causing parts of the wave-induced flow to spiral to the sides rather than crashing ahead. "We're leveraging this turbulence and these powerful jets to ultimately dissipate wave energy," Ferrandis says. Standing up to storms Once the researchers identified an optimal wave-dissipating structure, they fabricated a laboratory-scale version of an architected reef made from a series of the cylindrical structures, which they 3D-printed from plastic. Each test cylinder measured about 1 foot wide and 4 feet tall. They assembled a number of cylinders, each spaced about a foot apart, to form a fence-like structure, which they then lowered into a wave tank at MIT. They then generated waves of various heights and measured them before and after passing through the architected reef. "We saw the waves reduce substantially, as the reef destroyed their energy," Triantafyllou says. The team has also looked into making the structures more porous, and friendly to fish. They found that, rather than making each structure from a solid slab of plastic, they could use a more affordable and sustainable type of cement. "We've worked with biologists to test the cement we intend to use, and it's benign to fish, and ready to go," he adds. They identified an ideal pattern of "voxels," or microstructures, that cement could be molded into, in order to fabricate the reefs while creating pockets in which fish could live. This voxel geometry resembles individual egg cartons, stacked end to end, and appears to not affect the structure's overall wave-dissipating power. "These voxels still maintain a big drag while allowing fish to move inside," Ferrandis says. The team is currently fabricating cement voxel structures and assembling them into a lab-scale architected reef, which they will test under various wave conditions. They envision that the voxel design could be modular, and scalable to any desired size, and easy to transport and install in various offshore locations. "Now we're simulating actual sea patterns, and testing how these models will perform when we eventually have to deploy them," says Anjali Sinha, a graduate student at MIT who recently joined the group. Going forward, the team hopes to work with beach towns in Massachusetts to test the structures on a pilot scale. "These test structures would not be small," Triantafyllou emphasizes. "They would be about a mile long, and about 5 meters tall, and would cost something like 6 million dollars per mile. So it's not cheap. But it could prevent billions of dollars in storm damage. And with climate change, protecting the coasts will become a big issue." This work was funded, in part, by the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

New research across 18 countries, led by the University of Exeter's European Centre for Environment and Human Health, found that living on greener streets -- those with visible grass, trees, and vegetation -- is linked to better sleep. While past research has found a connection between green spaces and better sleep, this is the first time several different types of natural environments have been analysed across different countries. Lack of sleep, typically defined as fewer than six hours a night, is a significant public health issue in industrialised countries, affecting around 16-percent of UK adults. Poor sleep is linked to a range of adverse health and wellbeing outcomes, including non-communicable diseases such as obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular conditions, as well as increased risks of mortality. Lead author Dr Leanne Martin from the University of Exeter's European Centre for Environment and Human Health said: "People that lived in greener streets reported better mental health, which was the driving factor behind getting a better night's sleep. Streetscape greening initiatives already exist in urban cities to tackle environmental risks like flooding and heat island effects, but our findings suggest policymakers should extend that to residential areas to support public health by promoting healthier sleep habits." Data was used from over 16,000 people across 14 European countries, as well as Australia, Canada, USA, and Hong Kong, as part of the BlueHealth International Survey (BIS) -- a cross-sectional survey co-ordinated by the European Centre for Environment and Human Health in Penryn. Respondents were asked about the amount of greenery on their street, whether they had views of rivers, lakes, and coasts (collectively known as blue spaces) from home, how much leisure time spent in natural spaces, as well as their mental health and how many hours they slept a night. The research found individuals who lived in greener streets or had views of blue spaces from their home tended to report better mental health, which in turn was associated with healthier amounts of sleep. Individuals who spent more recreational time in green and blue spaces also reported better mental health and healthier sleep durations. Overall, results found 17 percent of people who lived on green streets reported getting fewer than six hours sleep a night, compared to 22 percent of those who did not live on green streets. Co-author of the study, Dr Mathew White, from the University of Vienna, said: "Whilst a five percent difference may seem small, these findings are comparable to the difference in sleep between people who are coping on their present income and those under financial strain. With money worries widely recognised as an important determinant of sleep, we think this demonstrates street greenness should be recognised by governments as an important public health issue." The main source of funding for this project was the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme.

Researchers from the Stowers Institute for Medical Research in collaboration with Universite Libre de Bruxelles in Belgium and Iowa State University compared cavefish to other animals more susceptible to starvation, and identified a gene responsible for the development of starvation-induced fatty liver. The study, published in Life Science Alliance on March 11, 2024, led by co-first authors Ansa Cobham, Ph.D., in the lab of Associate Investigator Nicolas Rohner, Ph.D., and Macarena Pozo-Morales, Ph.D., in the lab of Assistant Professor Sumeet Pal Singh, Ph.D., also showed that this evolutionarily conserved gene can be targeted by an existing drug candidate to protect against liver damage. "This same approach can be applied to what we see in overconsumption," Rohner said. "In Western societies where, often, too many calories and not enough exercise is a problem, this new understanding may lead to prevention or potential treatment of fatty liver disease." "We have discovered for the first time an organism -- cavefish -- that can avoid fatty liver under starvation conditions," said Cobham. "Fatty liver can result in complications like liver cirrhosis and liver failure. This study helps us understand more about the biology underlying these diseases in humans." Cavefish are cousins of the Mexican tetra river fish that flooded into underground caves over 100,000 years ago. The researchers show that in the absence of food, cavefish at early developmental stages not only survive much longer than their river fish counterparts, but also do not accumulate liver fat. "This was the first time we clearly showed that the mechanism for this resistance is accomplished by not accumulating excess fat in the liver," said Rohner. The accumulation of fat in liver cells leads to organ damage and atrophy or wasting away. The researchers compared gene expression levels between cavefish, river fish, zebrafish, and even fruit flies, identifying a gene that is activated during prolonged periods of starvation in all but cavefish. "Expression levels of this gene are reduced in cavefish, which is a good indicator that if we are able to target this gene in humans, we may be able to treat or manage human metabolic diseases such as Type 2 diabetes and obesity," said Cobham. The team's findings indicate that the starvation-induced gene not only regulates fatty liver disease, but its mechanism has also been conserved from fruit flies to fish to humans, or approximately 400 million years of animal evolution. Inhibiting this gene's protein in zebrafish and river fish larvae and deleting the gene in fruit flies resulted in less liver fat and larger livers indicating this protects the liver from damage and atrophy. "The collaboration between Dr. Sumeet Singh's team in Belgium, our team at Stowers, and scientists from Iowa State University combined our collective expertise in zebrafish, cavefish, and fruit flies to uncover the mechanism for starvation-induced fatty liver," said Rohner.

New research appearing today in the journal Nature could change all that, showing that a cocktail of drugs already approved to treat high blood pressure quickly reduces brain swelling and improves outcomes in animal models of brain injury. "Our research shows that cerebral edema is the consequence of impaired fluid flow through the glymphatic system and its associated lymphatic drainage," said Maiken Nedergaard, MD, DMSc, co-director of the University of Rochester Center for Translational Neuromedicine and senior author of the study. "This impairment is under adrenergic control, and can therefore be rescued pharmacologically by broadly inhibiting adrenergic receptors. Because these drugs are already being used clinically and have observed neurological benefits, there is the potential to move quickly to clinical studies to confirm these findings." Manipulating fluid flows in the brain to release post-TBI brain pressure The glymphatic system was first described by Nedergaard's lab in 2012 as the brain's unique waste removal process. Since then, a growing understanding of the mechanics of the system-aided by advanced imaging technologies and AI-driven models of fluid dynamics -- has allowed researchers to better predict and manipulate the movement of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the central nervous system. This research has opened new possibilities to treat Alzheimer's and other neurological disorders and more effectively deliver and distribute drugs in the central and peripheral nervous system, including the inner ear. The new study points to the potential to repurpose the glymphatic system to act as an emergency pressure release valve. Cerebral edema is a common consequence of moderate and severe cases of TBI. "In other parts of the body, edema helps with tissue repair, but because of the skull, the brain has limited capacity for expansion. As a result, pressure increases, blood supply decreases, and debris and toxic proteins are trapped at the injury site, compounding the damage and impairing recovery," said Rashad Hussain, PhD, an assistant professor in the Center for Translational Neuromedicine and first author of the study. One of the main triggers of cerebral edema is noradrenaline, a neurotransmitter that floods the brain immediately after TBI. Noradrenaline is typically associated with the flight-or-fight response, but in TBI this "adrenergic storm" impairs the flow of CSF in and out of the brain. The researchers describe how noradrenaline interferes with the function of the glymphatic system. Specifically, it restricts the movement of fluid through the section of the system's plumbing where CSF drains from the brain and flows into the meningeal and cervical lymph nodes in the neck. This observation led the team to speculate whether reopening these gates to the lymph nodes could flush excess CSF from the brain, thereby relieving pressure. Blood pressure medications suppress adrenaline "storm" and restart fluid flow To accomplish this, the team used a cocktail of drugs, including prazosin, atipamezole, and propranolol. This combination of alpha- and beta-blockers collectively suppress the different receptors used by cells to take up noradrenaline. Previous research in Nedergaard's lab has shown that this combination of drugs ramps up the glymphatic system, replicating the level of activity experienced when we sleep, which is when the system is most efficient in manipulating CSF flow to remove waste. In the new study, the same drug cocktail was administered to mice soon after TBI. Using fluorescent microspheres, the researchers traced CSF originating from the site of the swelling as it exited in bulk from the brain via lymphatic vessel, carrying with it debris from the injury to the lymph nodes. The result was an almost immediate elimination of cerebral edema and a sustained return to normal intracranial pressure in the animals. The treatment resulted significant recovery of cognitive, behavioral, and motor function. "These findings show that the adrenergic storm, the resulting edema and intracranial pressure, and retention of neural debris, can all be reversed by broad adrenergic inhibition, with subsequent improvement in recovery in injured mice," said Nedergaard. The authors point to several clinical studies that demonstrate the safety profiles and observed neurological benefits of these drugs, early indications that this approach could also benefit humans. Atipamezole reduces post-traumatic seizures, prazosin is effective in treating the post-traumatic stress associated with TBI, and beta-blockers reduce in-hospital mortality and improve functional outcome of TBI patients. Additionally, Nedergaard and her colleagues at the University of Copenhagen have shown that individuals who take beta-blockers for hypertension are at lower risk for Alzheimer's. Additional co-authors in the study include: Jeffrey Tifhof, Wei Wang, Arokoruba Cheetham-West, Wei Song, Weiguo Peng, Qian Sun, Sisi Peng, and Doug Kelley with the University of Rochester; Bjorn Sigurdsson and Pia Weikop with the University of Copenhagen; Virginia Pla, Hajime Hirase and Steve Goldman with both with the Universities of Rochester and Copenhagen; Daeyun Kim with the University of Minnesota; Jorge Castorena-Gonzalez with the Tulane University; and Michael Davis with the University of Missouri. The research was supported with funding from the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical Research Foundation, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, the Joint Programme -- Neurodegenerative Disease Research, the Novo Nordisk Foundation, the Lundbeck Foundation, and the US Army Research Office.

What can we expect in the worst-case scenario? In regions with a high risk of flooding, this is an important question: what extreme events should the protective measures be designed for? Often this is answered simply by looking at history: The worst flood events of the past decades or centuries are regarded as a realistic upper limit for what can be expected in the future. However, this can be misleading, as so-called "mega-floods" have shown in recent years. Time and again, extreme flood events occur, extraordinary outliers that were not considered possible on the basis of local data. However, a major research project carried out under the leadership of TU Wien (Vienna) has now been able to demonstrate: If one considers the entire European continent, these local surprises are no longer surprising at all. If data from other regions with similar hydrological conditions is taken into account, the extent of these "mega-floods" suddenly becomes predictable. This has drastic consequences for the way in which flood protection must be dimensioned. The results have now been presented in the journal Nature Geoscience . The simple extrapolation of probabilities In 2021, there was a devastating flood disaster in Germany and Belgium in which over 220 people died. An event of this magnitude had not been expected. "Predicting the extent of such mega-floods is very difficult," says Prof. Günter Blöschl from the Institute of Hydraulic Engineering and Water Resources Management at TU Wien, who led the project. Until now, the usual strategy has been to statistically examine previous flood events in the region: There is a high probability of minor flooding, a lower probability of major flooding. From this, one can try to extrapolate the probability of even greater floods. However, as has now been shown, there is a much better strategy: in an elaborate research project, data from more than 8,000 gauging stations across Europe, from the years 1810 to 2021, has now been analysed. "The decisive step was to anticipate mega-floods in one place by using data from similar river basins in other places on the continent" explains Dr. Miriam Bertola (Institute of Hydraulic Engineering and Water Resources Management, TU Wien), the lead author of the current publication. "In each river basin we can learn from other areas that have similar climatic and hydrological characteristics where mega-floods may have already occurred." Expecting the unexpected If one looks at the historical flood data of all these areas simultaneously, a pattern emerges: locally surprising "mega-floods" are often below or close to the upper limit of previous floods observed in similar regions. By using a larger amount of data, a statistical outlier at the local scale becomes something expected at the continental scale. The research team was able to show that flood disasters such as the one in the Rhine basin in 2021 could have been anticipated in this way -- it was actually also well within the expected range if continental data is included. An international perspective for better flood prevention "It is important to consider not only geographically adjacent areas, but also areas with similar conditions -- these may also be located further away," emphasizes Günter Blöschl. "It is therefore essential to move beyond national flood-risk assessment and share information on mega-floods across countries and continents, to reduce the surprise factor of their occurrence and save lives."

Using a combination of genome sequencing and satellite and environmental data, a team of researchers from the University of Maryland, the University of Florida and microbiome company EzBiome detected several pathogenic Vibrio species in water and oyster samples from Florida's Lee County, a coastal region that was devastated by Hurricane Ian. The samples, which were collected in October 2022, revealed the presence of two particularly concerning species: Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus . "We were very surprised to be able to detect -- without any difficulty -- the presence of these pathogens," said the study's senior author Rita Colwell, a Distinguished University Professor in the University of Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer Studies (UMIACS) who has studied Vibrio for the last 50 years. The study's findings correspond with a reported increase in V. vulnificus cases in the state of Florida in October 2022. According to the Florida Department of Health, Lee County, which had the highest caseload in the state, reported 38 infections and 11 deaths linked to vibriosis. Vibrio bacteria naturally occur in the ocean, where they live symbiotically with crustaceans, zooplankton and bivalves. When the bacteria come in contact with humans, some species can cause an infection known as vibriosis, but the side effects depend on the type of Vibrio and severity of the infection. V. parahaemolyticus can cause gastroenteritis and wound infections, while the V. vulnificus species can cause necrotizing fasciitis -- a flesh-eating infection -- and kills 1 in 5 infected people. People can contract vibriosis by eating raw or undercooked seafood or by getting seawater in an open wound. Because Vibrio thrive in warm saltwater, hurricanes and floods can increase the chances of a person becoming exposed. Several conditions during and after Hurricane Ian favored the growth of Vibrio bacteria, including the amount of rainfall, changes in sea surface temperature and concentrations of chlorophyll in the ocean, which can indicate densities of phytoplankton -- and subsequently zooplankton -- in an area. In places with plankton blooms, the researchers found an abundance of Vibrio bacteria. With warming oceans expected to fuel wetter and more powerful storms like Ian, coastal communities could see more Vibrio infections in the future. "These Vibrios generally grow well between 15 and 40 degrees Celsius [59-104 degrees Fahrenheit], so as the temperature warms, their generation time shortens and they divide faster and faster," Colwell said. "The warming of seawater -- which mixes with freshwater, creating optimal salinities -- really enhances the growth of Vibrios , so it's a very serious concern." While the environmental conditions in Florida following Hurricane Ian were ripe for vibriosis, these cases are not limited to southern climes. In August 2023, three people in New York and Connecticut died from V. vulnificus infections. Colwell and her co-authors -- which included Kyle Brumfield (Ph.D. '23, marine estuarine environmental sciences) and UMD Cell Biology and Molecular GeneticsResearch Professor Anwar Huq -- predicted this recent spike in vibriosis cases based on trending environmental conditions in the Northeast United States. As ocean temperatures continue to rise, Colwell said the rapidly warming Chesapeake Bay could also be affected. "The waters are much warmer in Florida right now than they are in the Chesapeake Bay, but on a lot of the East Coast, the waters are warming," Colwell said. "This is a threatening indication that we may be seeing more Vibrio vulnificus infections. Colwell and her co-authors noted that while they analyzed only a limited number of samples, their findings illustrate the potential of genetic analysis, environmental data and remote sensing to improve public health by proactively detecting and characterizing Vibrio pathogens. They also called for further investigation to quantify the prevalence of Vibrio bacteria in different locations, seasons and environmental conditions. Colwell said this research is not only vital to public health but also an important step in understanding our changing climate. "On the positive side, knowing that these infections are associated with the increased variability of a changing climate, perhaps now is the time to develop mechanisms to understand and mitigate it," Colwell said. "Climate change and flooding are clearly linked to infectious disease, and we need to take it seriously."

Lots of Americans -- about one-third of us -- are in the same situation and habitually get only five to six hours of sleep instead of the recommended seven to eight hours. But even a mild chronic sleep deficit may heighten the risk of developing heart disease later in life: Surveys of thousands of people have found that people who report mild but chronic sleep deficits have more heart disease later in life than people who get adequate sleep. A new Columbia study of women now shows what's happening in the body during chronic mild sleep deprivation. After just six weeks of shortened sleep, the study found, the cells that line our blood vessels are flooded by damaging oxidants. And unlike well-rested cells, sleep-restricted cells fail to activate antioxidant responses to clear the destructive molecules. The result: cells that are inflamed and dysfunctional, an early step in the development of cardiovascular disease. "This is some of the first direct evidence to show that mild chronic sleep deficits cause heart disease," says study leader Sanja Jelic, MD, director of the Center for Sleep Medicine at Columbia and professor of medicine in the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine at Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons. "Until now we've only seen associations between sleep and heart health in epidemiological studies, but these studies could be tainted by many confounders that cannot be identified and adjusted for. Only randomized controlled studies can determine if this connection is real and what changes in the body caused by short sleep could increase heart disease." Previous studies did not examine chronic sleep deficits Studies of human sleep have examined the physiological effects of a few nights of profound sleep deprivation. "But that's not how people behave night after night. Most people get up around the same time each day but tend to push back their bedtime one to two hours," Jelic says. "We wanted to mimic that behavior, which is the most common sleep pattern we see in adults." The researchers screened nearly 1,000 women in Washington Heights for the study, enrolling 35 healthy women who normally sleep seven to eight hours each night who could complete the 12-week study. For six weeks the women slept according to their usual routine; for the other six weeks they went to bed 1.5 hours later than usual. Each participant's sleep was verified with wrist-worn sleep trackers. Bottom line: Just go to sleep "Many problems could be solved if people sleep at least seven to eight hours per night," Jelic says. "People who are young and healthy need to know that if they keep getting less sleep than that, they're aggravating their cardiovascular risk." Next steps Recent epidemiological studies suggest that inconsistent bedtimes may raise the risk of heart disease. Jelic's team is designing a study to see if bedtime variability impacts vascular cells in the same way as chronic, but regular, short sleep.

Researchers looking into the question of what is the nutrient supply for the GASB say that they have now clearly identified that the nutrient content of Sargassum tissue could help determine the enrichment sources and potentially improve predictions and Sargassum management efforts. "We show clearly for the first time that Sargassum in the GASB is enhanced in both nitrogen and phosphorus, indicative of a healthy and thriving population," according to the journal article "Nutrient and arsenic biogeochemistry of Sargassum in the western Atlantic," published in Nature Communications . "Stable nitrogen isotope values point to riverine sources in some circumstances and are more equivocal in others. Distinguishing the various nutrient sources sustaining the GASB will require systematic snapshots of nutrient content and isotopic composition across its entire breadth," according to the paper. "Presumably, the closer one gets to the source, the higher the nitrogen and / or phosphorus content of Sargassum should be. In that sense, basin-wide patterns in nitrogen and phosphorus elemental composition could provide the fingerprinting necessary to unequivocally determine the sources." The paper notes that a variety of nutrient sources for the GASB blooms have been suggested, including upwelling, vertical mixing, discharge from the Amazon and Congo rivers, and atmospheric deposition. Though, the paper states that the causes of the GASB and the mechanisms controlling its variability remain unknown. The paper also indicates that the nutritional status of Sargassum in the GASB is enriched, with higher nitrogen and phosphorus content than are populations of Sargassum that reside in its Sargasso Sea habitat. "In its traditional environment, Sargassum is a great ecological benefit. However, the proliferation of biomass in the tropical Atlantic has proven the old adage that too much of a good thing can be bad," said journal article lead author Dennis McGillicuddy, Jr., senior scientist in the Applied Ocean Physics and Engineering Department at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). The finding that nitrogen and phosphorus are higher in the GASB than in the Sargasso Sea "is a smoking gun that the GASB inundations are nutrient-driven," said McGillicuddy. "A consequence of this finding is that it presents us potentially with the opportunity to use those nitrogen and phosphorus markers in Sargassum tissue to fingerprint the ultimate sources of these nutrients that are sustaining these seaweed blooms." In addition, the paper notes that the presence of arsenic in Sargassum tissue -- which reflects phosphorus limitation -- significantly constrains the utilization of the seaweed biomass that washes ashore. "As the Great Atlantic Sargassum Belt has grown over the last decade, the public has become increasingly aware of this phenomenon and its impact on coastal communities," said co-author Peter Morton, associate research scientist in the Department of Oceanography at Texas A&M University, College Station. "Our research shows that Sargassum could become enriched in arsenic, depending on the conditions in which it grows. Plans to remove or exploit this material when it washes ashore should consider the potential for Sargassum to contain high concentrations of arsenic, so we encourage affected communities to proceed with caution when exploring options to deal with seasonal inundations of Sargassum ." Due to the threats that the Sargassum inundations pose to the environment, economy, and human health, the paper recommends the need for expanded observational and modeling studies to understand the GASB's physical, biological, and chemical drivers. The paper notes that "the societal need for scientific understanding is urgent: improved seasonal to interannual predictions would offer tremendous value for proactive planning and response, while quantification of the underlying causes could inform potential management actions to mitigate the problem." McGillicuddy first saw Sargassum when he was a child growing up in Florida and his grandfather took him fishing near the seaweed because that was the best place to fish. "It was an oasis in the oceanic desert," McGillicuddy said. "Now, the system has changed in a fundamental way. We've got an oceanographic process out there that is creating this. As a scientist, and as a fisherman, I feel an urgent need to try to understand this situation, not only to help answer the interesting scientific questions around this problem, but do so in a way that we are able to understand the situation and eventually mitigate it in a way that would be of value to society," he said. McGillicuddy and co-author Brian Lapointe also stressed the importance of the interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of this research, which encompasses a number of disciplines including biology, chemistry, and physics. "This collaborative study illustrates the value of interdisciplinary research teams to understanding complex oceanographic phenomena in an era of rapid global change, in this case, the Great Atlantic Sargassum Belt that formed in 2011," said co-author Brian Lapointe, a research professor at Florida Atlantic University's Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute, and one of the world's foremost authorities on Sargassum . Funding for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences through the Woods Hole Center for Oceans and Human Health, WHOI, the Isham Family Charitable Fund, the State of Florida, and NASA. Sargassum samples of opportunity were collected on U.S. GO-SHIP lines A20 (Ryan Woosley, chief scientist; marine physical chemist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Center for Global Change Science), and A22 (Viviane Menezes, chief scientist; physical oceanographer at WHOI), carried out on the R/V Thomas G. Thompson (voyages TN389 and TN390) with the support of the U.S. National Science Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. U.S. GO-SHIP (Global Ocean Ship-based Hydrographic Investigations Program) is a component of International GO-SHIP.

Vast and powerful, the oceans can seem limitless in their abundance and impervious to disturbances. For millennia, humans have supported their lives, livelihoods and lifestyles with the ocean, relying on its diverse ecosystems for food and material, but also for recreation, business, wellness and tourism. Yet the future of our oceans is worrying, according to researchers at UCSB's National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS). "Our cumulative impact on the oceans, which is already substantial, is going to double by 2050 -- in just 25 years," said marine ecologist and NCEAS director Ben Halpern, who led the effort to forecast the future state of marine environments as they bow under the combined pressures of human activities, which include ocean warming, fisheries biomass loss, sea level rise, acidification and nutrient pollution, among other impacts. "It's sobering. And it's unexpected, not because impacts will be increasing -- that is not surprising -- but because they will be increasing so much, so fast." The research team, which includes collaborators from Nelson Mandela University in South Africa, also finds that the tropics and the poles will experience the fastest changes in impacts, and that coastal areas will feel the brunt of the increased impacts. Their research, supported in large part by the National Science Foundation, is published in the journal Science . A comprehensive global model of human impacts As human activity on the ocean and along the coast has intensified, so have impacts on the marine environment. Halpern and a group of scientists first tackled the challenge of understanding how these pieces fit together to affect the ocean nearly 20 years ago, laying the groundwork for the current study. "People tracked one issue at a time, but not everything together," Halpern said. "More importantly, there was a pervasive sense that the ocean is so huge the human impacts couldn't possibly be that bad." Their quest to build a comprehensive model of human impacts on the ocean led to a 2008 paper in the journal Science , a landmark study that synthesized 17 global data sets to map the intensity and extent of human activity on the world's oceans. That initial view revealed startling results: No place was untouched, and 41% of the world's marine environments were heavily impacted. "The previous paper tells us where we are; the current paper tells us where we are headed," Halpern said. Ocean warming and biomass loss due to fisheries are expected to be the largest overall contributors to future cumulative impacts. Meanwhile, the tropics face rapidly increasing rates of impact, while the poles, which already experience a high level of impact, are expected to experience even more. According to the paper, the high level of future impacts "may exceed the capacity of ecosystems to cope with environmental change," in turn posing challenges for human societies and institutions in a variety of ways." The world's coasts are expected to bear the brunt of these increasing cumulative impacts -- an unsurprising reality, the researchers say, given most human uses of the ocean are near coasts. Yet it's also a "worrisome result nonetheless," according to the paper, because the coasts "are where people derive most value from the ocean." Additionally, many countries are dependent on the ocean for food, livelihood and other benefits. "Many of these countries will face substantial increases," Halpern said. The authors contend that enacting policies to reduce climate change and to strengthen fisheries management could be effective ways to manage and reduce human impacts, given the outsize roles that ocean warming and biomass loss play in the estimate of future human impacts on the ocean. Likewise, prioritizing management of habitats that are expected to be heavily impacted -- such as salt marshes and mangroves -- could help reduce the pressures on them. In presenting these forecasts and analyses, the researchers hope that effective action can be taken sooner rather than later to minimize or mitigate the effects of increased pressures from human activity. "Being able to look into the future is a super powerful planning tool," Halpern said. "We can still alter that future; this paper is a warning, not a prescription." Research in this paper was also conducted by Melanie Frazier and Casey C. O'Hara at UCSB, and Alejandra Vargas-Fonseca and Amanda T. Lombard at Nelson Mandela University in South Africa.

"Unlike most nearby planet-forming disks, where water vapor dominates the inner regions, this disk is surprisingly rich in carbon dioxide," says Jenny Frediani, PhD student at the Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University. "In fact, water is so scarce in this system that it's barely detectable -- a dramatic contrast to what we typically observe." A newly formed star is initially deeply embedded in the gas cloud from which it was formed and creates a disk around itself where planets in turn can be formed. In conventional models of planet formation, pebbles rich in water ice drift from the cold outer disk toward the warmer inner regions, where the rising temperatures cause the ices to sublimate. This process usually results in strong water vapor signatures in the disk's inner zones. However, in this case, the JWST/MIRI spectrum shows a puzzlingly strong carbon dioxide signature instead. "This challenges current models of disk chemistry and evolution since the high carbon dioxide levels relative to water cannot be easily explained by standard disk evolution processes," Jenny Frediani explains. Arjan Bik, researcher at the Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University, adds, "Such a high abundance of carbon dioxide in the planet-forming zone is unexpected. It points to the possibility that intense ultraviolet radiation -- either from the host star or neighbouring massive stars -- is reshaping the chemistry of the disk." The researchers also detected rare isotopic variants of carbon dioxide, enriched in either carbon-13 or the oxygen isotopes ¹⁷O and ¹⁸O, clearly visible in the JWST data. These isotopologues could offer vital clues to long-standing questions about the unusual isotopic fingerprints found in meteorites and comets -- relics of our own Solar System's formation. This CO2-rich disk was found in the massive star-forming region NGC 6357, located approximately 1.7 kiloparsecs (about 53 quadrillion kilometers) away. The discovery was made by the eXtreme Ultraviolet Environments (XUE) collaboration, which focuses on how intense radiation fields impact disk chemistry. Maria-Claudia Ramirez-Tannus from the Max Planck Institute for Astronomy in Heidelberg and lead of the XUE collaboration says that it is an exciting discovery: "It reveals how extreme radiation environments -- common in massive star-forming regions -- can alter the building blocks of planets. Since most stars and likely most planets form in such regions, understanding these effects is essential for grasping the diversity of planetary atmospheres and their habitability potential." Thanks to JWST's MIRI instrument, astronomers can now observe distant, dust-enshrouded disks with unprecedented detail at infrared wavelengths -- providing critical insights into the physical and chemical conditions that govern planet formation. By comparing these intense environments with quieter, more isolated regions, researchers are uncovering the environmental diversity that shapes emerging planetary systems. Astronomers at Stockholm University and Chalmers have helped develop the MIRI instrument which is a camera and a spectrograph that observes mid- to long-wavelength infrared radiation from 5 microns to 28 microns. It also has coronagraphs, specifically designed to observe exoplanets. The study "XUE: The CO2-rich terrestrial planet-forming region of an externally irradiated Herbig disk" is published in Astronomy & Astrophysics .

On November 28, 1966, an American aeroplane flies over the Antarctic Peninsula just south of the southernmost tip of Chile. On board is a photographer, probably from the US Navy, whose job is to map the Antarctic landscape. But it turns out that the photographer is also documenting a very special situation that is in progress. He shoots an aerial photo of the Wordie Ice Shelf, which, 30 years later, has almost vanished after a total collapse. The consequence of this collapse was that the 'plug' that held large amounts of glacier ice broke off, leaving the ice sheet floating freely into the sea. Fortunately, Wordie is a relatively small ice shelf and the sea level rise it has caused can be measured in millimeters. But there are much larger ice shelves in Antarctica, which, like Wordie, could collapse due to climate change. Just the two largest ice shelves, Ronne and Ross, are believed to hold enough ice to account for sea level rises of up to five meters. If, in this context, we think that Antarctica is far away, we need to understand that the melting of ice in the Southern Hemisphere will cause sea levels to rise in places like Denmark in the Northern Hemisphere, due to the effects of gravity. A new research study provides insights that can help identify signs of incipient collapse in these ice shelves and assess the stage of collapse. The photo of Wordie from 28 November 1966 -- the first in a long series of images that continually document the collapse of the Wordie Ice Shelf through the 1960s -- has become a valuable first data point in a study of the ice shelf collapse recently completed by researchers at the University of Copenhagen. In their paper, now published in Nature Communications, they present a unique dataset based on the vast archives of old aerial images combined with modern satellite observations, which, for the first time, shows the collapse of an ice shelf as a constant evolution in a long time series. A critical insight that can be used to improve scientists' understanding of ice shelves and the mechanisms behind their collapse. "We have identified several signs of incipient ice shelf collapse that we expect will be observed in other ice shelves, but perhaps more importantly, the dataset has given us a multitude of pinning points that can reveal how far advanced a collapse is. It's a completely new tool that we can use to do reality checks on ice shelves that are at risk of collapsing or already in the process of collapsing," says Postdoc Mads Dømgaard from the Department of Geosciences and Natural Resource Management, who is lead author of the study. According to the researchers, this knowledge will enhance computer models of sea level rise and lead to more accurate predictions of when the water will rise, allowing for prioritization of investments in climate change adaptation in the most effective way. Warmer seawater and melting under the ice were most conclusive The hundreds of historical aerial photos were analyzed using a technique known as structure-from-motion photogrammetry. The method has enabled scientists to accurately reconstruct ice thickness, as well as its extent, surface structure and flow velocity, dating back to the 1960s. In this way, the researchers analyzed the collapse of Wordie and learned more about the factors involved. It was previously assumed that a warmer atmosphere was the primary factor leading to the collapse, and, similarly, that the formation of meltwater lakes on the ice surface had also played a part. The new study has disproved both assumptions. Instead, the researchers highlight melting under the ice where the sea and ice meet as definitive factors. "Our findings show that the primary driver of Wordie's collapse is rising sea temperatures, which have generated the melting beneath the floating ice shelf," Mads Dømgaard says. Collapse is tougher than we thought - like it or not Furthermore, the study's findings have already altered the foundation of scientists' knowledge about ice shelf collapse. According to co-author Anders Anker Bjørk, the new data advances our understanding of how and at what speed these collapses occur. "The tentative conclusion from our findings is that ice shelf collapse may be slower than we thought. This means that the risk of a very rapid development of violent sea level rise from melting in Antarctica is slightly lower, based on knowledge from studies like this one," says Anders Anker Bjørk, Assistant Professor at the Department of Geosciences and Natural Resource Management. But there is also a flip side to this, he explains: "It was already a supertanker that needed to be turned to stall the melting of ice in Antarctica, but our data shows a collapse process that is even more protracted than previously assumed. And this longer process will make it harder to reverse the trend once it has started. This is an unambiguous signal to prioritize halting greenhouse gas emissions now rather than sometime in the future," Anders Anker Bjørk says. Facts: ice shelves and sea level rise Ice shelves, like Wordie, act as a kind of brake on glaciers flowing from the ice sheet towards the sea. When an ice shelf vanishes, the glaciers lose this support and can begin to float and melt more rapidly. As the ice mass of ice shelves is already partially or wholly in the sea, their direct contribution to sea level rise is limited. On the other hand, the glacier ice they retain is on land and, therefore, every cubic meter affects the water level of the world's oceans. Although Antarctica is far away, areas like Denmark are being affected significantly by sea level rise caused by ice shelf collapses resulting from gravitational forces. Before Antarctica melts, its ice mass helps pull sea waters southwards. When the ice has melted into the sea, the gravitational field has changed, causing the oceans to the north to rise proportionally more. Facts: How dusty old photos became important data In the study, the researchers used images from multiple overflights of Wordie, shot between 1966 and 1969. In analyzing the historical aerial photos, the researchers employed the structure-from-motion photogrammetry method, which utilizes overlapping photos to calculate accurate three-dimensional models of landscapes or objects. By analyzing differences in perspective between the photos, it's possible to measure heights and distances with high accuracy. This allows tracing how the ice surface, thickness and velocity have changed over time.

"This is not good news for us as we head into the future," says Andrea Dutton, a professor of geoscience at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Dutton and her PhD student Karen Vyverberg at the University of Florida led an international collaboration that included researchers from University of Sydney, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Victoria University of Wellington and University of Massachusetts Amherst who analyzed fossilized corals discovered in the Seychelles islands. These particular fossils provided an exceptional opportunity for the researchers to reconstruct past sea levels. That's in part because they're remnants of coral species that only live in shallows very near the sea surface. Their tropical location also means they were far away from any past ice sheets, which have a more pronounced effect on local sea levels. By determining the ages of two dozen fossil corals from various elevations on the islands and analyzing the sediments around the fossils, the team gathered a wealth of insights. The findings will be published June 13 in the journal Science Advances . First, the team was able to confirm the timing of peak global sea levels to between 122 and 123,000 years ago. That was during a period known as the Last Interglacial, when global temperatures were actually very similar to what they are now. Such a precise date gives us a better understanding of the relationship between global climate and sea levels. Perhaps more importantly, though, the researchers discovered that there were three distinct periods of sudden and sharp sea-level rise over the 6,000 years leading up to peak sea levels during the Last Interglacial. These abrupt pulses of sea-level rise were punctuated by periods of falling seas, and Dutton says they point to times when the polar ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica -- thousands of miles away from the Seychelles islands -- were changing rapidly. "That says there's potential for this very rapid, dynamic change in both ice sheet volume and sea level change," says Dutton. "This is hugely important for coastal planners, policy makers and those in the business of risk management." These rises and falls in sea level that the team documented also point to a key difference between the present and the Last Interglacial, which is sometimes used as a model for understanding how the current and future climate could affect ice sheets and sea levels due to the similar temperatures between the two time periods. "These swings suggest that the polar ice sheets were growing and shrinking out of phase with each other as a result of temperature changes in the two hemispheres that were also not aligned," says Dutton. "So even though sea level rose at least several meters higher than present during this past warm period, if temperature rises simultaneously in both hemispheres as it is today, then we can expect future sea level rise to be even greater than it was back then." The researchers made one more sobering observation: One of the sharp pulses of sea-level rise they identified occurred at about the same time that the last remnants of a massive ice sheet in North America were likely collapsing, according to evidence collected by other teams working in the Atlantic Ocean. While there's no large North American ice sheet today, Dutton says this finding has important implications for understanding the dynamics of other present day ice sheets. That's because most scientists have not previously considered a North American ice sheet as a major factor in sea-level dynamics during the Last Interglacial. "But if ice was still present in North America several thousand years into this past warm period, then some of the rise we've documented would have required more meltwater from another ice sheet, such as Antarctica," says Dutton. "This would suggest that Antarctica was even more sensitive to warming than we previously recognized, because the full extent of sea-level rise flowing from the continent was masked by a remnant ice sheet in North America." In its totality, Dutton says the new evidence, thanks to fossilized corals from thousands of years ago suggests that sea levels could rise even faster and higher thanks to climate change than current projections indicate. "We could be looking at upward of 10 meters of global average sea-level rise in the future just based on the amount of warming that has already occurred," she says. The good news, as Dutton sees it, is that society has the means to blunt the impact of climate change on sea levels. "The more we do to draw down our greenhouse gas emissions, and the faster we do so, could prevent the worst scenarios from becoming our lived reality," Dutton says. This research received funding from the National Science Foundation (grant awards 1155495, 1159040, 1934477, 2035080 and 2202913).

Their study, published in Science, addresses a major bottleneck in the performance and stability of CO 2 reduction systems: the buildup of salt that clogs gas flow channels, reduces efficiency and causes the devices to fail prematurely. Using a technique they call acid-humidified CO 2 , the researchers extended the operational life of a CO 2 reduction system more than 50-fold, demonstrating more than 4,500 hours of stable operation in a scaled-up reactor -- a milestone for the field. Electrochemical CO 2 reduction, or CO 2 RR, is an emerging green technology that uses electricity, ideally from renewable sources, to transform climate-warming CO 2 into valuable products like carbon monoxide, ethylene or alcohols. These products can be further refined into fuels or used in industrial processes, potentially turning a major pollutant into a feedstock. However, practical implementation has been hindered by poor system stability. One persistent issue is the accumulation of potassium bicarbonate salts in the gas flow channels, which occurs when potassium ions migrate from the anolyte across the anion exchange membrane to the cathode reaction zone and combine with CO 2 under high pH conditions. "Salt precipitation blocks CO 2 transport and floods the gas diffusion electrode, which leads to performance failure," said Haotian Wang , the corresponding author of the study and associate professor of chemical and biomolecular engineering, materials science and nanoengineering and chemistry at Rice. "This typically happens within a few hundred hours, which is far from commercial viability." To combat this, the Rice team tried an elegant twist on a standard procedure. Instead of using water to humidify the CO 2 gas input into the reactor, they bubbled the gas through an acid solution such as hydrochloric, formic or acetic acid. The vapor from the acid is carried into the cathode reaction chamber in trace amounts, just enough to alter the local chemistry. Because the salts formed with these acids are much more soluble than potassium bicarbonate, they don't crystallize and block the channels. The effect was dramatic. In tests using a silver catalyst -- a common benchmark for converting CO 2 to carbon monoxide -- the system operated stably for over 2,000 hours in a lab-scale device and more than 4,500 hours in a 100-square-centimeter, scaled-up electrolyzer. In contrast, systems using standard water-humidified CO 2 failed after about 80 hours because of salt buildup. Importantly, the acid-humidified method proved effective across multiple catalyst types, including zinc oxide, copper oxide and bismuth oxide, all of which are used to target different CO 2 RR products. The researchers also demonstrated that the method could be scaled without compromising performance with large-scale devices maintaining energy efficiency and avoiding salt blockage over extended periods. They observed minimal corrosion or damage to the anion exchange membranes that are typically sensitive to chloride by keeping the acid concentrations low. The approach was also shown to be compatible with commonly used membranes and materials, reinforcing its potential for integration into existing systems. To observe salt formation in real time, the team used custom-built reactors with transparent flow plates. Under conventional water humidification, salt crystals began forming within 48 hours. With acid-humidified CO 2 , however, no significant crystal accumulation was observed even after hundreds of hours, and any small deposits were eventually dissolved and carried out of the system. "Using the traditional method of water-humidified CO 2 could lead to salt formation in the cathode gas flow channels," said co-first author Shaoyun Hao, postdoctoral research associate in chemical and biomolecular engineering at Rice. "We hypothesized -- and confirmed -- that acid vapor could dissolve the salt and convert the low solubility KHCO 3 into salt with higher solubility, thus shifting the solubility balance just enough to avoid clogging without affecting catalyst performance." The work opens the door to more durable, scalable CO 2 electrolyzers, a critical need if the technology is to be deployed at industrial scales as part of carbon capture and utilization strategies. The simplicity of the approach, involving only small tweaks to existing humidification setups, means it can be adopted without significant redesigns or added costs. "This is a major finding for CO 2 electrolysis," said Ahmad Elgazzar, co-first author and graduate student in chemical and biomolecular engineering at Rice. "Our method addresses a long-standing obstacle with a low-cost, easily implementable solution. It's a step toward making carbon utilization technologies more commercially viable and more sustainable." This work was supported by the Robert A. Welch Foundation, Rice, the National Science Foundation and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation.

However, up to now no observations of these seiches existed to confirm this theory. Even a Danish military vessel which visited the fjord three days into the first seismic event did not observe the wave which was shaking the Earth. In the new study, the Oxford researchers used novel analysis techniques to interpret satellite altimetry data. This measures the height of the Earth's surface (including the ocean) by recording how long it takes for a radar pulse to travel from a satellite to the surface and back again. Up to now, conventional satellite altimeters were not able to capture evidence of the wave due to long gaps between observations, and the fact that they sample data directly beneath the spacecraft, producing 1D profiles along the sea-surface. This makes them incapable of depicting the differences in water height needed to spot the waves. This study used data captured by the new Surface Water Ocean Topography (SWOT) satellite, launched in December 2022 to map the height of water across 90% of Earth's surface. At the heart of SWOT is the cutting-edge Ka-band Radar Interferometer (KaRIn) instrument, which uses two antennas mounted on a 10-meter boom on either side of the satellite. These two antennas work together to triangulate the return signals that bounce back from the radar pulse -- enabling them to measure ocean and surface water levels with unprecedented accuracy (up to 2.5 meters resolution) along a swath 30 miles (50 kilometers) wide. Using KaRIn data, the researchers made elevation maps of the Greenland Fjord at various time points following the two tsunamis. These showed clear, cross-channel slopes with height differences of up to two metres. Crucially, the slopes in these maps occurred in opposite directions, showing that water moved backwards and forwards across the channel. To prove their theory, the researchers linked these observations to small movements of the Earth's crust measured thousands of kilometres away. This connection enabled them to reconstruct the characteristics of the wave, even for periods which the satellite did not observe. The researchers also reconstructed weather and tidal conditions to confirm that the observations could not have been caused by winds or tides. Lead author Thomas Monahan (DPhil student, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford) said: "Climate change is giving rise to new, unseen extremes. These extremes are changing the fastest in remote areas, such as the Arctic, where our ability to measure them using physical sensors is limited. This study shows how we can leverage the next generation of satellite earth observation technologies to study these processes." "SWOT is a game changer for studying oceanic processes in regions such as fjords which previous satellites struggled to see into." Co-author Professor Thomas Adcock (Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford) said: "This study is an example of how the next generation of satellite data can resolve phenomena that has remained a mystery in the past. We will be able to get new insights into ocean extremes such as tsunamis, storm surges, and freak waves. However, to get the most out of these data we will need to innovate and use both machine learning and our knowledge of ocean physics to interpret our new results."

"Government agencies and researchers use data from tide gauges to measure water levels in coastal areas, then use that data to estimate flood frequency in the region," says Miyuki Hino, corresponding author of a paper on the study and assistant professor of city and regional planning at UNC. "Those estimates are used both to assess how often flooding has taken place and to predict how often flooding may take place in the future. However, our study shows that this approach does not accurately capture how often flooding takes place or how long those floods last." "Due to sea-level rise, we're now seeing flooding in coastal areas outside of extreme storms like hurricanes," says Katherine Anarde, co-author of the paper and an assistant professor of coastal engineering at NC State. "There can be flooding during everyday rain showers or at high tide on sunny days. It's important that the methodology we use to monitor and predict flooding reflects this reality, since sea-level rise means these flooding events are going to become even more common. "Our research shows you need land-based measures of flooding to capture the burden on coastal residents, which can inform policy and planning decisions moving forward," Anarde says. Anarde and Hino are part of the Sunny Day Flooding Project, a research initiative focused on improving flood monitoring, broadening our understanding of coastal flooding, and identifying the most effective flood mitigation strategies. At present, there are two widely accepted "thresholds" used to infer flooding on land based on tide gauge data: the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) High Tide Flooding threshold (HTF) and the National Weather Service's minor flood threshold (NWS). For this study, the researchers made use of data from a network of land-based sensors that their team designed to identify flooded roadways and deployed across eastern North Carolina. The researchers focused on a year of data from sensors in three communities: Beaufort, Carolina Beach and Sea Level. During the study period, the sensors detected flooding on 26 days in Beaufort, 65 days in Carolina Beach and 128 days in Sea Level. "These numbers were very different from what the HTF and NWS thresholds tell us based on water levels at tide gauges," Anarde says. "In general, the thresholds drastically underestimated the number of floods. For example, when you subtract floods associated with extreme storms, we recorded flooding on 122 days in Sea Level. But if you looked at the data from the closest tidal gauge, the NWS threshold inferred that there were 31 days of flooding. And the HTF threshold inferred only nine days of flooding. "However, the NWS threshold sometimes overestimates the number of flood days," Anarde says. "For example, Carolina Beach had 65 days of flooding, but if you applied the NWS threshold using data from the closest tidal gauge, it inferred that there were 120 days of flooding." "In addition to being inaccurate in terms of how often it is flooding, our findings also show that the actual duration of the floods is longer than is captured by the HTF and NWF thresholds," Hino says. "Essentially, the thresholds don't adequately account for how long it takes water to drain off of land." "More accurate information on coastal flooding can inform where and how we invest resources in building more resilient communities," says Anarde. "It's hard to design an efficient solution when you don't know the scope of the problem." Anarde and Hino are now working with partner communities to identify and evaluate response strategies that can mitigate the impacts of chronic flooding. "Every community is unique, so there's no one-size-fits-all solution," says Hino. "But with more accurate data, we can help communities assess what response strategy is best for them, now and in the future." The paper, "Land-based Sensors Reveal High Frequency of Coastal Flooding," will be published June 2 in the open-access journal Nature Communications Earth & Environment . The paper was co-authored by Ryan McCune and Thomas Thelen, Ph.D. students at NC State; Elizabeth Farquhar, a research associate at NC State; Perri Woodard, an undergraduate student at NC State; Tessa Fridell, a former undergraduate student at UNC; and Anthony Whipple, a research technician at UNC. This work was done with support from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security under grant number 2015-ST-061-ND0001-01. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the researchers and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S Department of Homeland Security. The work was also done with support from North Carolina Sea Grant under institution grant NA22OAR4170109; the National Science Foundation's Human-Environment and Geographical Systems Program under grant BCS-2215195; NOAA's Climate Adaptation Partnerships program and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, under grant NA23OAR4310474; NASA, under grant 80NSSC24K0504; the North Carolina Department of Transportation, under grant RP2024-56; the Gulf Research Program Early-Career Research Fellowship, under award 2000013691-2022; and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, under award 5-K01-HD112604-02. The researchers also thank their community partners in the Town of Beaufort, the Town of Carolina Beach, and the Core Sound Waterfowl Museum and Heritage Center for their support.

The findings suggest the reef can withstand rising sea levels in isolation but is vulnerable to associated environmental stressors arising from global climate change. Led by Professor Jody Webster from the School of Geosciences, the research was published today in Nature Communications . It draws from a geological time capsule of fossil reef cores, extracted from the seabed under the Great Barrier Reef. The findings suggest rapid sea level rise in isolation did not spell the end of the reef's predecessor, Reef 4. Rather, associated environmental stressors like poor water quality and warming climates led, in combination, to its demise about 10,000 years ago (towards the end of the last ice age). The ensuing one to two thousand years saw Reef 4 transition. Its shallow reef ecosystem moved landward to reestablish itself as the Great Barrier Reef we know today. "This research shows us a healthy, active barrier reef can grow well in response to quite fast sea level rises," said Professor Webster. "It's the combination of additional environmental stressors, on top of rapid sea level rise, that lead to its demise. The findings lend weight to already grave concerns about the Great Barrier Reef. "The modern reef faces rising sea levels, more heat waves and extensive bleaching, along with increasing sediment and nutrient input. This combination, on top of rising sea levels, is of deep concern. If the current trajectory continues, we should be concerned about whether the Great Barrier Reef will survive the next 50 to 100 years in its current state. "It won't die but its characteristics may change. We will see a different collection of coral species, perhaps simpler and not as structurally complex." Learning from the 'proto-Great Barrier Reef' The 15 to 20-metre cores underpinning this research comprise a mix of fossil coral, algae and sediments. They reveal how the reef's previous incarnations responded to rapid sea level rise. The cores analysed for this research focus on how the reef ecosystem evolved between 13,000 to 10,000 years ago. Of particular interest to Professor Webster's team was the period known as Meltwater pulse 1B, between 11,450 and 11,100 years ago, when sea levels rose very rapidly. "This 350-year period is crucial; it covers a time when global sea levels rose very rapidly," Professor Webster said. "It's a period when polar ice sheets are thought to have experienced accelerated melting due to warming temperatures. Based on records from Barbados, we previously thought sea levels were rising by about 40 millimetres a year at this time. "Our research shows the rise wasn't so large and fast. It was more likely to have been in the order of three to five millimetres a year, comparable to what we're experiencing today." Extracted by a drilling ship from beneath the Great Barrier Reef's shelf edge at a depth of 40 to 50 metres, the cores offered new insight into how Reef 4, also known as the proto-Great Barrier Reef, was impacted by rising sea levels. "Reef 4 is very exciting," Professor Webster said. "It had a similar morphology and mix of coral reef communities to the modern Great Barrier Reef. The types of algae and corals, and their growth rates, are comparable. "Understanding the environmental changes that influenced it, and led to its ultimate demise, therefore offers clues on what might happen to the modern reef." Professor Webster and colleagues used radiometric dating and reef habitat information to accurately pinpoint core samples pertaining to Meltwater pulse 1B. The cores underpinning this research were obtained under the International Ocean Discovery Program International Ocean Drilling Program (IODP), an international marine research collaboration involving 21 nations. Professor Webster said his latest research highlights the importance of IODP and shows the value of these records, obtained by drilling deep beneath the seabed. They provide paleoclimate and paleoenvironmental data, going far further back in time than instrumental records which go back only 50 to 100 years. "These data allow us to more precisely understand how reef and coastal ecosystems have responded to rapid environmental changes, like the rises in sea level and temperature we face today." Professor Webster completed this research in collaboration with colleagues from the University of Tokyo, Australian National University, Nagoya University, the University of Granada and Aix-Marseille University.

The team found a statistically significant link between severe natural disasters, such as heatwaves, droughts, floods and wildfires, and loss of health care infrastructure -- including hospitals and outpatient care facilities. Data was drawn from 3,108 United States counties nationwide from 2000-2014. It included whether a county never had, lost, gained, or always had a health care facility, and a record of 6,263 climate disasters those counties experienced during that period. After adjusting for other factors that could impact closures, such as total population and poverty, the team found an even stronger association between severe climate events and closures of outpatient care practices. The findings were recently published in the International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health . County-level disaster data came from the Spatial Hazards and Events Losses database. Using data on losses, the researchers classified each disaster's impact as "minor" (causing a death or less than $10 in property damage per capita), "moderate" (causing two deaths or $10-50 in damage per capita), or "major" (causing three or more deaths or more than $50 in property damage per capita). Health care infrastructure data came from the National Establishment Time Series database. Unlike previous studies that typically focused on a single disaster in a single location, such as Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Sandy, the currently study captured all climate-related disaster events nationwide during the time period. "Communities experiencing severe disasters often face declines in health care resources, with the effects lasting for years," said senior author Yvonne Michael, ScD, a professor of epidemiology in the Dornsife School of Public Health. "This underscores the potential long-term effects of disasters on human health, beyond their immediate, acute impacts." By 2050, the effects of climate change across the globe are predicted to cause 14.5 million deaths, as well as $12.5 trillion in economic costs (including $1.1 trillion faced by health care systems), according to a 2024 World Economic Forum report. "Our study offers another key data point to support investment in public health infrastructure, as well as disaster planning and recovery efforts," said lead author Kevin Chang, MD, who contributed to the research as a medical student in Drexel's College of Medicine. "Without these investments, more patients will experience an interruption in care and worse health post-disaster." The team found no link between closures of pharmacies and climate disasters, and suspect that this is due to the wide prevalence of "pharmacy deserts," communities that lack access to a pharmacy -- created by the expanded role of pharmacy benefit managers and use of online pharmacies across the United States. The study did not examine other types of medical facilities, such as community health centers, urgent care, and long-term care practices. The team's study also showed that counties that lost health care facilities were more likely to experience high poverty and greater racial segregation. Similarly, counties that maintained or gained health care facilities following a natural disaster had lower levels of poverty. "More affluent communities often have better connections, such as political influence, that help them maintain these important health institutions following a period of crisis," said Michael. "These collaborations after a natural disaster are especially critical in low-income communities that often otherwise lack the resources to rebuild shuttered health institutions." The authors suggest that these findings may be conservative, considering the increasing number of climate-induced natural disasters and costs associated with these events. Future studies, the authors suggest, should seek out what influences this link between climate disasters and loss of health care infrastructure, including policy, funding and measures of community resilience. In addition to Michael and Chang, other authors on this study include Jana A. Hirsch from Drexel's Dornsife School of Public Health, and Lauren Clay from University of Maryland, Baltimore County. The work was funded by the National Institute of Aging and Drexel's Urban Health Collaborative.

Participation of citizens in NBS projects leads to innovation in design and quality, as well as people gaining greater benefits from green and blue spaces (for access, recreation and health and wellbeing), researchers found. The study showed that involving communities. Projects are also more likely to be successful in supporting nature renewal when they involve policymakers from across different sectors, rather than being carried out in silos, and when they align with government policy and strategy. Researchers carried out interviews and workshops in three European cities -- Paris Region, France, Velika Gorica, Croatia, and Aarhus, Denmark as part of the EU Horizon 2020-funded REGREEN project. They found the size and complexity of the urban area and the ways the cities were governed had an impact on the outcome of the NBS. In all areas the increased prevalence and severity of climate change effects (e.g. flooding, heat effects) and witnessing initiatives from other countries were drivers of NBS innovation. Also influential were shifts in public and media perception around climate change, a tradition of use of public spaces by citizens and support from politicians and political leaders. However, the research found that encouraging participation by residents and others, and experimentation may not necessarily lead to desired outcomes where there are also strong external (top-down) policy drivers (e.g. housing development pressures). The study, by Carolyn Petersen, Duncan Russel and Nick Kirsop-Taylor from the University of Exeter, and Anne Jensen and Anders Branth Pedersen, from Aarhus University, is published in the journal Discover Cities. Dr Petersen said: "When NBS projects aligned with and were integrated into government strategy with support from local leaders, this helped promote innovation in all three cities, as did involving local people in the co-design of NBS initiatives. "We also found key differences. In the Paris Region there was more evidence of citizens and local NGOs developing their own NBS initiatives, based on tackling external factors and priorities such as increasing the liveability of urban areas, biodiversity, health and wellbeing, and climate adaptation, without government assistance, at least initially. Whereas, in Velika Gorica the barriers to local groups doing this, such as funding, were reported to be greater. "Key differences that led to differing NBS outcomes included the size and complexity of urban areas, the effectiveness of enforcement of planning regulations, and the extent to which the governing architecture enabled citizens and local NGOs to develop their own NBS initiatives. "The analysis indicates that where citizen participation and consultation were built into NBS projects, this brought both innovation in terms of the design, quality, biodiversity and or multi-functionality of green/blue spaces -- whether this was greening of schoolyards, redesign of under-used green spaces or river restoration."

Coastal lagoons are critical ecosystems that provide essential habitats and ecosystem services, including carbon sequestration, nutrient cycling, and fisheries support. "Under normal conditions, lagoons act as nurseries for fish and crustaceans, they are internationally important feeding grounds for migratory birds, and they protect coasts from storm surges," says the University's Dr Chris Keneally. "Their microbial makeup is what makes this happen, recycling nutrients and fostering this high productivity, allowing diverse plant and animal life to flourish. "However, a single hot, dry summer, like the one we have recently experienced, can completely shift this important habitat into a salty, green soup, leading to the microbes becoming less diverse and those that are salt-tolerant becoming more dominant. "Key processes, such as nitrification, de-nitrification, and carbon cycling are then disrupted, altering nutrient retention, organic matter decomposition, and greenhouse gas emissions." The trend of hypersalinity in coastal lagoons is global, occurring most often in arid and semi-arid coastal lagoons, such as those in Australia, the Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf. The phenomenon has accelerated in Australia over the last 40 years. "The rise in salinity can be attributed to elevated temperatures, enhanced evaporation, reduced rain and freshwater inputs, and rising sea levels," says Dr Keneally, whose recent study was published in Earth-Science Reviews . "Human factors such as upstream water diversions, urbanisation and development, and groundwater depletion also reduce freshwater inflow to coastal lagoons. "We can mitigate the impacts of these activities by restoring environmental flows. Allocating water for the environment can maintain lagoon flushing, and nutrient runoff can be reduced by upgrading wastewater plants, re-establishing wetlands, and increasing efforts to retain nutrients in our agricultural lands throughout catchments worldwide. "To buffer the effects of drought or sea-level rise, we could also re-open closed tidal inlets to improve mixing, or improving salt tolerant vegetation coverage to trap sediment and slow evaporation." A lagoon can bounce back surprisingly fast when appropriately flushed. After the record 2022 Murray-Darling floods, South Australia's Coorong Lagoon's microbiome shifted back toward its healthier, more diverse state within months, demonstrating that timely freshwater inputs can rapidly reverse 'salty soup' conditions. Addressing high salinity and nutrient pollution in lagoons benefits the ecosystems they serve while mitigating human health impacts. "Fish kills hurt local fisheries, algae blooms may produce toxins or airborne irritants, and lost seagrass can weaken coastal flood protection," says Dr Keneally. "Emerging research also suggests degradation can make these ecosystems a source of potent greenhouse emissions, adding to climate impacts felt well beyond the shoreline."

This activity was previously believed to take place over hundreds or even thousands of years. However, high-resolution satellite observations reveal one huge glacier has been relentlessly pinching ice from its slower-moving neighbour over a period of less than 18 years. University of Leeds researchers say it is unprecedented that this change in ice flow direction can be directly witnessed in Antarctica over such a short time span and its discovery is an important step in improving our understanding of the future of Antarctica and its contribution to sea level rise. Their findings are published today (8 May) in the journal The Cryosphere. A study, led by Leeds, shows the speeding up of seven ice streams in West Antarctica, with one almost doubling in speed (87%) at the boundary where the ice meets the ocean between 2005 and 2022, and three speeding up by between 60% and 84% during that time. Six of the streams reached average speeds of over 700 metres per year in 2022 -- equivalent to advancing the length of seven football pitches in one year, a remarkably fast pace for ice. The team used satellite data to measure the change in ice speed in the Pope, Smith and Kohler (PSK) region in West Antarctica. They found the ice streams had sped up by 51% on average since 2005, at the grounding line -- the point at which glaciers and ice shelves start to float. Grounding lines provide evidence of ice-sheet instability, because changes in their position reflect imbalance with the surrounding ocean and affect the flow of inland ice. However, the research team found that one piece of data was particularly striking. In stark contrast to the widespread acceleration observed between 2005 and 2022 on all other glaciers in the region, the ice stream on Kohler West slowed by 10%. The fastest rate of speed change was observed on its neighbour, Kohler East, as well as Smith West Glacier, which were flowing around 560 m/yr faster in 2022 compared to 2005. Nowadays, several glaciers around Antarctica are responding to climate change by flowing faster into the ocean. When the flow of a glacier speeds up, its ice becomes more stretched and thins at the same time, yet the Kohler West ice stream has slowed down. Lead author Dr Heather Selley, who undertook this work as a PhD researcher in the School of Earth and Environment at the University of Leeds, said: "We think that the observed slowdown on Kohler West Glacier is due to the redirection of ice flow towards its neighbour -- Kohler East. This is due to the large change in Kohler West's surface slope, likely caused by the vastly different thinning rates on its neighbouring glaciers. "Because Kohler East's ice stream is flowing and thinning faster as it travels, it absorbs, or "steals" ice from Kohler West. "This is effectively an act of 'ice piracy', where ice flow is redirected from one glacier to another, and the accelerating glacier is essentially 'thieving' ice from its slowing neighbour." She added: "We didn't know ice streams could 'steal' ice from each over such a short period, so this is a fascinating discovery. "It's unprecedented as we're seeing this from satellite data and it's happening at a rate of under 18 years, whereas we've always thought it was this extremely long, slow process." International collaboration The team calculated the ice velocity using a tracking technique which measures the displacement of visible features at or near the ice surface, such as crevasses or rifts. Data on ice-thinning rates from the European Space Agency's (ESA) CryoSat mission was also used in the study. Leeds collaborated on the study with researchers from the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and the UK Centre for Polar Observation and Modelling (CPOM) -- which is led from Northumbria University -- using data provided by satellites belonging to ESA, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Canadian Space Agency and NASA. Pierre Dutrieux, study co-author and climate researcher at BAS, said: "This study provides an interesting demonstration of ice piracy, where flow into one glacier gradually switches to flow into another glacier, as the ocean melts the grounding zone and re-configures ice flow." The team set out to establish mechanisms and impact of changes in conditions that impact how fast the ice flows, such as warming of the ocean, change in ocean circulation, change in air temperature and the amount of snow falling. They found that redirection of ice flow and 'piracy' at previously unobserved rates has changed the amount of ice flowing into the floating shelves that are fed by these streams. Crosson Ice Shelf, around 40 miles wide -- roughly the distance from Leeds to Manchester -- and Dotson Ice Shelf, around 30 miles wide -- roughly the distance from Leeds to York -- are two of the most rapidly changing outlets in West Antarctica, displaying both significant thinning and grounding-line retreat in recent decades. Future effects Professor Anna Hogg, study co-author and Professor of Earth Observation in the School of Earth and Environment at the University of Leeds, said: "The changes in flow direction have substantially altered the ice mass flux into Dotson and Crosson Ice Shelves, likely playing an important role in maintaining Dotson and accelerating the deterioration of Crosson. "This suggests that ice flow redirection is an important new process in contemporary ice sheet dynamics, which is required to understand present-day structural change in glaciers and the future evolution of these systems." Over 410 million people could be at risk from rising sea levels by 2100 as a result of the climate crisis. Observed sea level rise data shows that global sea levels have already risen by more than 10 cm over the last decade. Dr Martin Wearing, ESA Digital Twin Earth Scientist and Polar Science Cluster Coordinator, said: "This new study highlights the unique ability of satellites to provide both the temporal and spatial coverage required to assess change in the polar regions. "Using data from Copernicus Sentinel-1 and ESA's Earth Explorer CryoSat, the team has revealed the complex evolution of ice flow in part of West Antarctica over the past few decades. Understanding these changing dynamics and what drives them is crucial for improved projections of future ice-sheet change and contributions to sea-level rise." The research was funded by UKRI Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), ESA and NASA Headquarters.

Showing people continuous data, such as temperature increases in a town, left people with a vague impression of gradual change, but showing binary data for the same town, specifically whether a lake froze or not each winter, brought home the striking shift, said incoming UCLA communications professor and cognitive psychologist Rachit Dubey. "People are adjusting to worsening environmental conditions, like multiple fire seasons per year, disturbingly fast," said Dubey, senior author of the study. "When we used the same temperature data for a location but presented it in a starker way, it broke through people's climate apathy. Unfortunately, compared to those who looked at a clearer presentation of the same information, those who only looked at gradual data perceived a 12% smaller climate impact and cared less." Dubey studies how people reason about climate change, how to communicate about it and how to improve climate communications. He noted how heavily political and personal experiences influence risk perceptions around climate change, and how quickly people redefine "normal." A Vox article reporting on climate apathy in 2020 inspired Dubey to look deeper into the human tendency to adjust to change, even as science has proven that humans' greenhouse gas emissions are causing climate change and increasing disasters like wildfires, droughts, floods, hurricanes, and sea-level rise. "For years, we assumed that if the climate worsened enough, people would act, but instead, we're seeing the 'boiling frog' effect, where humans continuously reset their perception of 'normal' every few years," Dubey said. "People are adjusting to worsening environmental conditions, like multiple fire seasons per year, disturbingly fast. My research examines how people are mentally adapting to the negative changes in our environment." In the study, published April 17 in the journal Nature Human Behavior , the researchers first asked study participants about the climate in a fictional city they named "Townsville," and later asked a second group about five real lakeside cities around the world, including Lake George in New York and Grand Traverse Bay in Michigan. In both versions of the experiment, the scientists showed half of the study participants a graph of temperature increases from 1940-2020, and the other half a graph showing whether temperatures caused the lake to freeze each winter. Whether charting temperatures or lake freezes, each pair of charts drew from the same slowly warming weather information. As temperatures gradually climbed, the lakes stopped freezing as often. For the real towns, study participants hearing about the lake also learned about the decline of activities like ice skating and ice fishing. When the researchers asked participants to rate from 1 to 10 how much climate change impacted the town, people who learned about a range of temperatures responded lower than people who learned whether the lake froze -- on average, 6.6, compared to 7.5, or 12% higher. Making the emotional connection to local traditions, whether ice skating in the winter or freedom from wildfire smoke in the summer, may also contribute to overcoming apathy, said lead author Grace Liu, a Ph.D. student at Carnegie Mellon University. "Our study drives home the importance of discussing climate change not just in gradual temperature terms, but in concrete, either-or terms, showing how life has changed," Liu said. "It's not just warmer winters; it's also a loss of ice hockey and white Christmases. It's not just hotter summers; it's the disappearance of a swimming hole due to drought or soccer practice (being) canceled because it's dangerously hot." The researchers hope the results help anyone designing visual representations of climate change graphics or those seeking to clarify gradual changes, from climate generalists and data visualization professionals to policymakers and journalists. "People working in these fields have a sense that binary data is more effective, and our study adds theoretical rigor, using careful cognitive experiments," Dubey said. "Our study also helps explain why the 'Show Your Stripes' visualization is so compelling because it takes continuous data and presents it in a more binary format." By focusing on the increasing rate of once-rare events, like extreme heat days or thousand-year floods, or the slow loss of seasonal joys like skiing or outdoor ice skating, the researchers hope that the same temperature data that once led to public apathy can instead help communities care more about the climate crisis.

As a growing number of local and national governments struggle to recover from -- and protect against -- more frequent and destructive climate disasters, some have directly sought compensation from fossil fuel companies through civil cases and "polluters pay" laws. But many of these actions are being challenged or slowed in court, partly due to the difficulty in showing that specific climate impacts occurred because of any one company's greenhouse gas emissions. A new study published April 23 in the journal Nature , however, provides a tool for potentially recouping the costs of extreme weather amplified by climate change. The researchers lay out a scientific framework they report can be used to trace specific climate damages back to emissions from individual fossil fuel companies. The framework combines climate modeling with publicly available emissions data to contrast the current climate and its impacts to what it would be like without the heat-trapping gases a company's activities released into the atmosphere. This causal link is known as a "but for" standard -- as in, a climate catastrophe likely would not have occurred but for an individual firm's actions, the researchers report. "We argue that the scientific case for climate liability is closed, even if the future of these cases remains an open question," says Justin Mankin, the study's senior author and associate professor of geography at Dartmouth. The study, he says, answers a question first posed in 2003 of whether science could ever link an individual firm's emissions to climate change. "Just over 20 years later, we find the answer to be 'yes,'" says Mankin, who directs the Climate Modeling and Impacts Group at Dartmouth. "Our framework can provide robust emissions-based attributions of climate damages at the corporate scale. This should help courts better evaluate liability claims for the losses and disruptions resulting from human-caused climate change." Mankin and the study's first author, Christopher Callahan, a postdoctoral scholar at Stanford who began working on the project as a PhD candidate at Dartmouth, deploy the framework to provide the first causal estimates of regional economic losses due to extreme heat resulting from the emissions of individual fossil fuel companies. Extreme heat linked to carbon dioxide and methane from just 111 companies cost the world economy $28 trillion from 1991 to 2020, with $9 trillion of those losses attributable to the five top-emitting firms, according to the study. The highest-emitting investor-owned firm they examined may be responsible for $791 billion to $3.6 trillion in heat-related losses over that period, the researchers report. "Our findings demonstrate that it is in fact possible to compare the world as it is to a world absent individual emitters," Callahan says. "The affluence of the Western economy has been based on fossil fuels," he says, "but just as a pharmaceutical company would not be absolved from the negative effects of a drug by the benefits of that drug, fossil fuel companies should not be excused for the damage they've caused by the prosperity their products have generated." The study, Callahan and Mankin say, benefits from 20 years of accumulating real-world climate impacts, the increased availability of climate and socioeconomic data, and methodological advances in "climate attribution science," a form of modeling that allows scientists to track the effects of climate change almost in real time. Climate attribution is the crux of Vermont's 2024 Climate Superfund Act, which was partially informed by Mankin's testimony and an early version of the Nature study. Passed in the wake of devastating statewide floods in 2023, the law empowers the state attorney general to compel major fossil fuel companies to help cover the cost of disasters that can be scientifically linked to their emissions. A recent lawsuit challenges the state's authority to collect such damages, as well as Vermont's ability to accurately use climate attribution science to determine them. The attribution framework reported in Nature incorporates established, peer-reviewed scientific methods for identifying the effect of specific emission levels on extreme weather. Callahan and Mankin also build on advances in the physical and social sciences that have drawn clearer connects between greenhouse gases, local climate change, and economic losses. Critically, the model goes a step further than existing research by removing total emissions -- measured in billions of tons -- from the equation to identify a company's specific greenhouse gas footprint. Previous attribution models have hinged on concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, which are measured in parts-per-million that are harder to attribute to specific sources, Callahan says. "Our approach simulates emissions directly, allowing us to trace warming and its repercussions back to specific emitters," Callahan says. His and Mankin's focus on extreme heat builds on their previous work calculating global financial losses due to heat waves and the economic damages individual countries have caused to others by contributing to climate warming. "Extreme heat is indelibly linked to climate change itself and the losses from it have been an instigator for legal claims. So, it's an obvious place to illustrate the broad application of our approach," Mankin says. "We also live in a world that has warmed considerably over the past 20 years," he says. "This analysis is not a predictive exercise where we ask what the future holds. Instead, it's a documentary effort where we show what has already happened and provide the reason why."

The problem? Future climate conditions might differ substantially from the used projections, according to Ashmita Bhattacharya, a civil engineering doctoral student at Penn State and first author of a study published in Nature Communications by an interdisciplinary team of researchers from Penn State and the University of Pittsburgh. Communities risk either overbuilding too much costly infrastructure -- the construction and maintenance of which also contribute excess carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, further exacerbating the rate of climate change -- or designing inadequate defenses. This can lead to excessive flood-related damages and even more costly repairs. "The issue with the current state of practice in climate adaptation is the large uncertainty associated with how the climate demands us to evolve in the future," said Chris Forest, professor of climate dynamics in the Department of Meteorology and Atmospheric Science at Penn State and co-investigator of the study. Global temperatures shattered records quicker than expected in 2023 and again in 2024. To help communities avoid making a misinformed, potentially expensive investment, with no ability to re-allocate spent resources if future conditions are not what was expected, the team created a model that provides decision support over time as more information becomes available, while keeping costs as low as possible, according to Gordon Warn, professor in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Penn State and co-corresponding author. "Our approach suggests dynamic actions in time, responding to the actual evolving climate, while also considering possible future scenarios in an optimal sense," Warn said. By suggesting adaptation actions over time rather than committing resources for a comprehensive protection system up front, the model's long-term strategic approach could potentially translate into significant savings for municipalities, according to Bhattacharya. The researchers tested the model on scenarios inspired by Manhattan and Staten Island in New York, finding that the model's long-term path of adaptation recommendations -- based upon observations of real-time conditions and long-term objectives -- resulted in lower overall costs compared to a conventional decision-making framework based on a static cost-benefit analysis. The model is underpinned by advanced mathematical and computational techniques. One, known as "(Partially Observable) Markov Decision Processes," mathematically represents nature's unpredictability through "beliefs," which quantify the uncertainty about possible future states, assigning probabilities to each. The model constantly updates its understanding of these beliefs about future sea level rise scenarios as new data is collected, just as a chess player carefully studies the board after each move to understand the likelihood of an opponent's next maneuver. The chess player may forego an immediate capture of a piece to keep another move in their back pocket for a later point in time. Similarly, the model may recommend a smaller seawall initially or not to take action unless certain conditions are met down the road. The model's sequence of suggested actions are generated through a technique called "dynamic programming," which optimally evaluates decision-tree like formations based on new data and the latest decision made. "Key to this are either indirect or direct observations of the physical process -- for example, sea-level rise and storm surge, which are measurable via tidal gauges," Bhattacharya said. "This dynamic adaptation leads to lower costs in implementation, maintenance, damages and environmental impacts in comparison to the static cost-benefit actions." The model also accounts for the environmental impacts of a potential build or maintenance action, added Bhattacharya. She explained that the researchers tied such actions as concrete seawall construction -- which generates a carbon footprint from cement manufacturing, mining, transportation, equipment use and future repairs -- to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's estimates of the social cost of carbon, the damage caused by each ton of carbon dioxide emissions released into the atmosphere. In addition to traditional concrete-based infrastructure options, the research team also evaluated nature-based solutions that can be used on their own or in tandem with traditional "gray" infrastructure, like a concrete wall. For instance, a recommended action could include a smaller wall and the addition of an oyster reef, which could help lessen the impact of incoming waves at a much lower carbon footprint, or a salt marsh, whose carbon uptake properties also help offset the carbon dioxide released from the wall's construction. In their simulation testing of New York City's coastlines, the researchers found that including the social cost of carbon encouraged earlier adaptation actions, and that adaptation actions were taken more frequently in comparison to cases that excluded it. "This is because the goal of the adaptation problem is to minimize the overall costs of adaptation including damages and the emission of carbon that comes with it," Warn said. "What this result means is that by ignoring carbon emissions we are underestimating the overall cost of flood-related damages." The team's forthcoming efforts center on scaling up the model and testing it against increasingly detailed scenarios and different coastal contexts. Eight of the world's 10 largest cities are located along coastlines, according to the U.N. Atlas of the Oceans. "The framework remains the same, but the data to be used -- geography of the region, property values and so forth -- need to reflect the local regions," said Kostas Papakonstantinou, associate professor of civil and environmental engineering at Penn State and co-corresponding author. He mentioned the model could eventually be used by the government or insurance companies to incentivize adaptation actions, likening it to when insurance rates were reduced for cars with the advent of anti-lock braking systems. "Similarly, National Flood Insurance Program costs could reduce rates when protective measures are justifiably taken in time," Papakonstantinou said. "Insurance coverage after flood events can also be directly considered in our framework, particularly when paid by the entity that is also the decision maker, like the federal government." Co-investigators from Penn State also included Lauren McPhillips, assistant professor of civil and environmental engineering and Digant Chavda, doctoral student in civil engineering. From the University of Pittsburgh, co-investigators included Melissa Bilec, the George M. and Eva M. Bevier Professor in Civil and Environmental Engineering and Co-director of the Mascaro Center for Sustainable Innovation; and Rahaf Hasan, doctoral student in civil engineering. The U.S. National Science Foundation funded this project.

Peatlands are a special type of wetland with enormous potential to either help or hurt global efforts to address climate change. If we want peatlands on our side, we'll have to protect them. But that's difficult to do, since we still don't yet know how many of them exist or where they are. Winton's latest research, published in the journal Environmental Research Letters provides the first data-driven map of both newly documented and predicted peatland areas across Colombia's eastern lowlands. Institutions including ETH Zurich, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, and Stanford University contributed to the research. Winton is lead author, and senior author Alison Hoyt is an Assistant Professor of Earth System Science at Stanford. Winton and the team estimate that the region contains somewhere between 7,370 and 36,200 square kilometers of peatlands. Protecting these ecosystems could help Colombia reduce its carbon emissions as part of international climate change agreements. Carbon emissions are the excessive amounts of carbon dioxide gas released into the atmosphere by human activities, especially the burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil, and natural gas. When excess carbon dioxide builds up in the atmosphere, it acts like a heat trapping blanket, warming our planet and resulting in climate change. To address the problem, we mainly need to reduce our use of fossil fuels. But it's also important to conserve key ecosystems that naturally act as "carbon sinks," trapping and storing some of our emissions underground. That's where peatlands come in. Peatlands are great at capturing carbon because their perpetually soggy soils deprive decomposer organisms of the oxygen they need to fully break down dead plants. Normally, plants absorb some carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and incorporate the carbon into their tissues, then when the plants die, decomposers digest them, releasing carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere. But in peatlands, the decomposition process grinds to a halt, so over time, a large amount of carbon accumulates and remains trapped in peat soils in the form of partially decomposed organic matter. In Colombia, Winton's team found that the average per-area carbon densities in peatlands are four to 10 times higher than in the Amazon rainforest. This finding tracks with what scientists know about the carbon sequestration abilities of peatlands in other parts of the world. "On a global scale, peatlands cover only 3% of land surface but store more carbon than all of the world's trees," Winton explained. "We tend to focus on trees when we think about natural capacity to remove some of the excess carbon dioxide from our atmosphere, but peatlands punch way above their weight in terms of carbon storage." Essentially, peatlands are like unsung heroes that have been working behind the scenes to help buffer the impact of our fossil fuel emissions. But there's a catch. Peatlands can only continue to store carbon if they remain consistently wet. When peatlands are drained for agriculture or other development, decomposer organisms in the soil get right back to work breaking down the partially decomposed organic matter in peat soils, releasing stored carbon into the atmosphere. Dried out peatlands can also catch fire, rapidly releasing their carbon stores. Unfortunately, this scenario is currently playing out in some parts of the world. "There has recently been mass drainage of peatlands for agriculture in Southeast Asia, resulting in soil compaction and subsidence and catastrophic wildfires that become a huge source of carbon to the atmosphere," Winton said. "Indonesia, for example, is actually a huge outlier in terms of their emissions relative to GDP because of these types of land conversion. And once peatlands are destroyed, they can take 1,000 years to recover lost soil carbon, so it really demonstrates the importance of working proactively to protect these ecosystems." One of the major challenges in protecting peatlands is that they're not always easily distinguishable from other types of wetlands based on their surface appearances. Documenting them requires careful investigation, but they remain understudied in many parts of the world. In Colombia, for example, five decades of civil war previously made many parts of the country inaccessible for ecological research. Peace agreements have now made research possible, but the country is also experiencing rapid environmental degradation, meaning there's a good chance that peatlands are being destroyed before they can even be identified. Finding Colombia's peatlands and slowing the rate of their destruction could prevent the release of significant carbon stores, reducing the nation's overall carbon emissions. With that goal in mind, Winton and a team of researchers set out in search of peat. Starting in regions identified by a global predictive map for wetlands, they talked with local people to get a sense for what plant communities might be associated with peatlands. Then they used satellite imagery to find promising areas to visit and investigate. It was a difficult, but ultimately rewarding process that spanned three years. "We visited a lot of wetlands without finding any peat, and we kind of had to stumble around and struggle a bit before we figured out how to find what we were looking for," Winton recalls. "One day we were swimming through chest-deep water in this swamp, and I remember diving down under the flood water to grab a handful of soil. That's when we found our first peat, and we realized we were finally in the right place." Winton and his team ended up finding peat soils at 51 of the more than 100 wetland sites they visited. At each site where they found peat, they collected soil samples and detailed data on water conditions and plant communities. They identified two specific types of Colombian peatlands -- palm swamps, and white-sand peatlands -- both with forested and open variations. White-sand peatlands had not previously been documented in South America. Winton's team described them as permanently wet areas forested by thin-stemmed and often stunted trees, growing in up to two meters of peat soil atop white sand. The team's new observations about the characteristics of Colombia's peatlands allowed them to build an improved predictive model, showing where additional peatlands likely exist across Colombia's lowlands. Researchers also analyzed the soil samples they collected in order to determine their carbon content. Taken together, these results allowed the team to estimate that Colombia's peatlands may currently be sequestering an amount of carbon equivalent to 70 years worth of the country's emissions from fossil fuels and industry. Winton hopes that improved understanding of the value of these peatland resources and where they might be distributed could help local scientists and the Colombian government continue the work to identify and protect more of the country's peatlands. "There are many places across Colombia and around the world where we could still find large peatlands that we didn't know existed that would totally upend current assumptions," Winton said. "We really need more research across the tropics to groundtruth and identify the distribution of peatlands, so that we can prioritize their conservation globally with a more complete picture."

"Our findings reiterate the already observed threat of coastal erosion as a hazard to sea level rise in Hawai'i," said Richelle Moskvichev, geospatial modeler at the CRC in the UH Mānoa School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology and lead author of the study. "In rapidly eroding areas, communities may see damage to roads, homes, or underground infrastructure. Shorelines along the north shore and east side of Oʻahu that are backed with hard-armoring, such as seawalls, could experience total beach loss." To create erosion predictions, the team of researchers used a computer model that incorporates about thirty years of satellite imagery, as well as aerial and drone imagery. The new model also directly accounts for the seasonal movement of sand. For example, when large swells arrive in the winter on Oʻahu's north shore, sand is transported from one part of the beach to another. Given prior modeling efforts, the team's own survey observations, and anecdotal evidence from residents, the researchers expected to see erosion predicted for many sandy beaches around Oʻahu. "By including additional satellite data and seasonal modeling, our forecasts show that erosion will increase by nearly 44% above our previous estimates in the short-term, meaning that we anticipate more severe erosion sooner," said Moskvichev. Coastal erosion can limit beach access, damage fragile ecosystems and infrastructure, and destroy homes. "This study provides an update on potential areas of shoreline change around Oʻahu, and can inform long-term development planning for coastal communities and infrastructure of the island," said Chip Fletcher, interim Dean of SOEST, director of CRC, and senior author of the study. "This UH-led research provides science-backed data to those who create local adaptation strategies, and ultimately to those most affected by the forecasted hazards. With improved forecasting for erosion hazard zones around the coast, communities, planners, and policymakers can create targeted mitigation and adaptation efforts." The research team plans to expand their modeling efforts to the other Hawaiian islands, so that similar predictions are accessible to planners and the communities on all islands. Additionally, they plan to use the results in conjunction with other hazard predictions, such as flooding and groundwater inundation, to analyze overlapping locations and timing of risk to communities.

Of the projected inundation caused by sea level rise, it is estimated 98 per cent of prawn sites and 50 per cent of prawn production would be impacted. The estimated annual economic losses of these projected impacts would range between AUD$12.6-22.6 million for barramundi and AUD$36.9-127.6 million for prawns by the year 2100. Lead researcher Marina Christofidis, a PhD candidate from Griffith's Australian Rivers Institute, said Queensland was the largest terrestrial aquaculture producer in Australia, largely consisting of coastal pond-based production. "But, under high-emission scenarios, Queensland is also projected to experience a 0.8m sea level rise by 2100," she said. "Aquaculture is central to livelihoods and food security, providing security to meet growing human seafood and protein demand without surpassing environmental limits. "But the aquaculture industry is vulnerable to climate change impacts, including sea level rise and so this needed to be assessed." Ms Christofidis and her team conducted the assessment by using existing datasets on coastal inundation and erosion from sea level rise from the Queensland government. They combined this with novel, satellite-derived data on current aquaculture production locations and identified aquaculture development areas, resulting in a dataset covering 647.14 km2, comprising 341 lots and 275 farms. Among the Local Government areas (LGAs) in Queensland, considering all lots, the areas projected to be most affected by sea level rise were: Cassowary Coast regional (3.89km2, 71%) Whitsunday Regional (3.63km2, 39%) Gold Coast Regional (3.04 km2, 57%) Mackay Regional (2.42 km2, 100%). The most vulnerable LGAs regarding productive prawn ponds were: Gold Coast city (1.12km², 92%) Burdekin Shire (0.59km², 49%) Isaac Regional (0.36km², 42%) Cassowary (0.30km², 20%) Whitsunday Regional (0.26km², 5%) Mackay Regional (0.073km², 100%). Barramundi ponds were most exposed across: Whitsunday Regional (0.43km², 73%) Douglas Shire (0.23 km2, 44%) Cassowary Coast Regional (0.085km², 97%). "These results are an early warning sign for Queensland's aquaculture industry. We need to integrate climate risks into planning and mitigation strategies in coastal industries like aquaculture both in Australia and globally," Ms Christofidis said. "For the future of aquaculture in the region, careful considerations should be taken for high-risk aquaculture developments areas located in low elevation coastal zones; developing these areas needs to be adaptable to potential sea level rise in the future to avoid mis-investment. "And transitioning from traditional aquaculture to more resilient systems such as integrating prawn ponds with nature-based solutions for coastal protection -- such as mangroves, green seawalls, artificial reefs, fencing and netting -- could help to protect coastal aquaculture and infrastructure."

Released today, the report reveals Australia has experienced a 37 per cent increase in excess heat factor over the past 20 years. Lead author and Director of the Lancet Countdown Centre in Oceania, Professor Paul Beggs from Macquarie University, says these findings underscore the importance of long-term tracking of climate hazards and exposures in Australia. "The frequency of health-damaging heat has increased substantially since the 1970s," says Professor Beggs. The report presents a comprehensive assessment of the connections between health and climate change in Australia across five domains: health hazards and impacts; adaptation planning; mitigation actions; economics and finance; and public and political engagement. Rising litigation For the first time, the report measures health and climate change litigation, with Australia having the second-highest number of climate change cases globally. "Health was raised as an issue in eleven Australian climate cases between 2014 and 2023," says Professor Beggs. "Courts have closely examined detailed evidence about how climate change directly and indirectly affects people's health, especially for vulnerable groups." Key deficiencies identified in Australia's response to climate and health threats include a 17 per cent drop in the number of volunteer firefighters in just seven years, undermining Australia's capacity to respond to bushfires. Continued dominance of fossil fuels in Australia's energy supply also contribute to climate risks. Greenhouse gas emissions from Australia's health care sector rose in 2021 to their highest level since 2010, likely due in part to shifts in patterns of care in response to COVID-19. Good news on progress Areas of progress identified include the Australian Government's completion of the first National Climate Risk Assessment, which included health and social support as one of eleven priority risks. "This past year Australia has taken a crucial step forward in understanding how risks are connected across sectors," says Professor Hilary Bambrick, one of the authors of the report and Director of the National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health at The Australian National University. "This Assessment should facilitate more considered and coordinated planning and response to increasingly dangerous climate change to better protect human health and wellbeing." Renewable energy now provides almost 40 per cent of Australia's electricity, with growth in both large-scale and small-scale generation and storage. "Electricity generation from renewables keeps accelerating, fossil fuel generation is shrinking, but ensuring reliability of electricity supply demands even greater investment in renewables and storage," says Professor Stefan Trueck, another report author and Director of Macquarie University's Centre for Transforming Energy Markets. The sale of electric vehicles reached an all-time high in 2023 of 98,436, accounting for 8.47 per cent of all new vehicle sales. While Australia had a reprieve from major catastrophic climate events in 2023, New Zealand experienced Cyclone Gabrielle and unprecedented floods. Professor Alistair Woodward, another author on the report and Professor of Epidemiology and Biostatistics at the University of Auckland says: "A strength of the Countdown report is that it includes views from both sides of the Tasman. "Australia and New Zealand differ geographically, but both are being squeezed by climate change, and we can learn from each other's policy and health system responses." Pivotal Period The report states that the next five years are pivotal for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and transitioning to renewable energy. Scientific research on health and climate change in Australia has grown dramatically, with 525 publications in 2023, marking a 29 per cent increase from 2022. The MJA-Lancet Countdown, established in 2017, is an annual assessment tracking progress on health and climate change in Australia. The 2024 report represents the work of 25 experts from 15 institutions across Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the USA, in a multidisciplinary collaboration across the fields of climate science, public health, energy policy, economics, and environmental research. In future reports, the authors plan to introduce indicators on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health and climate change, and mental health impacts of climate change.

Convex Seascape Survey scientists are studying the impact of fishing methods that use towed nets which are dragged along the seafloor, such as trawling and dredging. These methods are the main way that humans disturb ocean sediments -- the world's largest reservoir of organic carbon -- but there is disagreement about the amount of carbon these methods release. The new study, led by researchers at the University of Exeter, begins to untangle this mystery. "To find out how much carbon is being released by these fishing methods, we need to know how much of the seabed is actually being disturbed," said Mollie Rickwood, from the Centre for Ecology and Conservation on Exeter's Penryn Campus in Cornwall. "The best data available is from European fishing vessels, and previous research has used European fishing gear metrics to estimate the area of seafloor disturbed globally. "Our main finding is that vessel and gear sizes vary a lot from country to country -- so using European data to make global estimates is likely to lead to large inaccuracies in the amount of the seafloor trawled, and therefore how much carbon could be released to the atmosphere." The new paper demonstrates the need for good regional data on the size of fishing vessels and gear, to allow accurate estimates of seafloor disturbance. "At present, this is almost impossible due to the big European bias in existing data, as well as a lack of standardised reporting of fishing gear," Rickwood continued. "Our paper is a 'call to arms' to address these knowledge gaps and encourage global collaboration between science and industry to make this data available." The paper, published in the journal Fish and Fisheries , is entitled: "Regional variation in active bottom-contacting gear footprints." The Convex Seascape Survey, an ambitious five-year global research programme, is the largest attempt yet to build a greater understanding of the properties and capabilities of the ocean and its continental shelves in the earth's carbon cycle, in the urgent effort to slow climate change. "Ocean carbon stores could be more secure than those on land, where forests, bogs and tundra are increasingly impacted by wildfire, flood and drought. So it is critical we understand how safe carbon is once it is locked away in the seabed," said Professor Callum Roberts of Exeter University, who leads the Convex Seascape Survey.

These are some critical questions that a new computer simulation, co-developed by a CU Boulder ecologist, can answer. In a paper published March 5 in Nature Ecology & Evolution , researchers presented a model that aims to understand how extreme weather events, worsened by climate change, will affect ecosystems and the benefits they provide to humans. Based on the model, a Minnesota forest could lose up to 50% of its timber revenue if a severe windstorm hits. "With climate change, there's an urgent need to incorporate the impacts of extreme events like mega-fires and hurricanes have on the benefits nature provides," said Laura Dee, the paper's first author and associate professor in the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. "This research is an important step toward anticipating impacts to ecosystem services so that we can adapt management strategies accordingly." Scientists use the term "ecosystem services" or "nature's contributions to people" to refer to the essential functions that nature provides to support human life and well-being. Tree roots purify water, insects pollinate crops and forests lock away carbon, helping to stabilize the climate. In addition to these tangible benefits, mountains, lakes and oceans offer recreational enjoyment for people and hold cultural significance for communities. Previous models for predicting how ecosystems respond to climate change tend to assume that changes are steady. For example, a gradual increase in global temperatures of up to 1.5°C. But as climate change makes extreme weather events like wildfires and floods more frequent and severe, the impacts from rapid disturbances have become significant. Dee and her team developed a new mathematical model that tracks how the probability of an extreme weather event affects certain species and the ecosystem services they provide. The model also incorporates how people value these services. To show the model's potential, the team applied it to calculate the possible consequences of extreme windstorms in a mid-latitude forest in northern Minnesota. The model considered how winds have different effects on different tree species, each of which has distinct economic value. For example, thick white cedar trees are more resilient to windstorms than balsam fir trees, but the balsam fir can sell at a higher price. The model suggested that a windstorm, depending on its intensity, can slash the total timber value of the forest by 23% to 50%. Recreational opportunities like hiking and camping would also take a hit. Dee said that researchers and land management officials could use the model to evaluate the impacts of any disturbances, from drought to invasive species. Dee's research group at CU Boulder studies how prescribed fire strategies, or deliberately burning specific areas under controlled conditions, can reduce wildfire risks in Colorado. The new model also helps to identify the areas where scientists should prioritize burning to achieve the greatest reduction in fire risk, while also considering other benefits trees provide, such as removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and filtering water. "Nature's contributions to people have not typically been valued and are usually left out of key decision-making processes when developing land management policies and strategies," Dee said. The United Nation's World Meteorological Organization announced on Tuesday that more than 150 unprecedented extreme weather events struck Earth last year. With disturbances becoming more common, future Gross Domestic Product analyses, for example, should start incorporating the impacts of climate change, Dee added. "If we fail to consider the growing risks from extreme weather events, we could lose more than we realize," she said.

Researchers conducted interviews with more than 20 farmers in Kansas and Missouri to understand their communication about climate change. Results showed respondents had a range of views on climate change from being convinced of its effects and taking action in their farming operations to skepticism -- but all avoided discussing it to varying extents. "People were worried about a variety of reactions. Some said they couldn't even talk about it with their families because they would give them a weird look if they brought it up," said Hong Tien Vu, associate professor of journalism & mass communications at KU and lead author of the study. "That was a low-level worry, but others said they had heard people laughing at them or were concerned about their neighbors not working with them if they had different opinions." The study was born from research Vu and students started during the COVID-19 pandemic. The group received private donor funding to study local climate change effects. Students interviewed scientists on campus and farmers in surrounding communities about climate change, their views on it and how it affects them. Farmers were reluctant to discuss the topic on camera. "When we talk about climate change, we tend to look at broad effects like sea level rise. It can be difficult for people to find relevance in topics like that in their lives. We wanted to focus on factors that relate to people's lives here in Kansas," Vu said. "We wanted to interview farmers specifically because they are on the front lines of climate change impacts, both in terms of contributing to it through factors like emissions and feeling the effects of it." Given farmers' reluctance to discuss the topic on camera, researchers decided to conduct interviews in which they could guarantee anonymity for respondents. Farmers then discussed their opinions on the topic, how it affects their lives and work, and why they avoid discussing it. The researchers examined the topic through the lens of spiral of silence theory, which posits that when discussing controversial topics, people judge the prevailing opinion of others before deciding whether to speak. If they feel they are in the minority, people will often choose not to discuss a topic, which can have long-term ramifications, including silencing people and exacerbating problems that people choose not to address. The results confirmed the prevalence of a spiral of silence among Kansas and Missouri farmers. The respondents were both men and women, ranging in age from their 20s to 70s. When asked their thoughts on climate change, responses ranged from believing it is real, scientifically proven and having effects now, to being skeptical both of its prevalence and whether it is caused by humans. But across the board, respondents indicated they generally avoid discussing the topic. The farmers gave a range of reasons why they avoid it. Many simply did not want a conflict that could result in violence or an argument with neighbors or community members. Some feared it could damage their business, as neighbors might be less likely to work with them and share equipment or people might give them a negative online review and tell people not to buy their products at farmers' markets and other locales if they disagreed with their views. Farmers said they also tried to gauge a person's opinions based on interpersonal cues before deciding whether to discuss climate change. For example, the type of vehicle a person drives, whether a large pickup or hybrid car, can provide clues about their opinions on the matter. Spiral of silence theory holds that people traditionally used news media to gauge political opinion on a potentially controversial topic. However, respondents in the study indicated they felt news media only politicized the topic and therefore was not a trustworthy way of determining how people felt. Instead, many turned to social media where they could see if people posted on the topic or to find others to discuss it with, without fear of arguments or contentious conversations. "The algorithm can allow you to choose who to talk to or who to exclude," Vu said of social media. "People also often feel masked on social media. To me, that is a way of losing conversations and can give you a false sense of prevalence of opinions by eliminating cross examples." The study, co-written with Nhung Nguyen, lecturer; Nazra Izhar, doctoral candidate; and Vaibhav Diwanji, assistant professor of journalism and mass communications, all at KU, was published in the journal Environmental Communication. When asked how they deal with the effects of climate change, several farmers reported taking measures such as switching to organic methods, fallowing fields to counter overuse of land and seeking information on more sustainable practices. Several also reported feeling isolated in general and given that they felt they could not discuss climate change, took to journaling as a way to process their thoughts. Vu and colleagues, who have studied how climate change is viewed and reported globally, said understanding how the issue is viewed and discussed in more local settings is also important because people need to work together in day-to-day operations like farming as well as for policy solutions. If pressing issues are not discussed, it can negatively affect how they are dealt with on interpersonal levels and at local levels of government, they argue. As part of the larger research project, the group plans to use journalistic storytelling techniques to document how people are dealing with climate change locally and their opinions on the topic. They also plan to test the effects of different content elements such as psychological distance and modalities like text, video, podcast or virtual reality on public perceptions of and behaviors toward sustainability. "In our conversations with farmers, we found they often felt excluded from other conversations on climate change," Vu said. "It felt like they were picking their battles with everyone, because they are often blamed for things like emissions, while working on adjusting their farming practices for mitigation and adaptation purpose. We think not talking about climate change is a serious issue."

"Our findings highlight that subsidence is a major, yet often overlooked, factor in assessments of future flood exposure," said Kyle Murray, lead author of the study and researcher with the Climate Resilience Collaborative (CRC) at the UH Manoa School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST). "In rapidly subsiding areas, sea level rise impacts will be felt much sooner than previously estimated, which means that we must prepare for flooding on a shorter timeline." Murray and co-authors analyzed nearly two decades of satellite radar data to measure vertical land motion across the Hawaiian Islands. They also developed a high-resolution digital elevation model to accurately map coastal topography. By combining these datasets, they modeled how sea level rise and ongoing subsidence will exacerbate future flooding. As islands in the Hawaiian chain move farther from the hotspot beneath the Big Island, they very slowly sink due to their own weight. This island-wide subsidence rate is low on O'ahu, around 0.6 millimeters, about the thickness of 10 sheets of printer paper, each year. However, the researchers found localized areas on the south shore of O'ahu where land is sinking nearly 40 times faster, exceeding 25 millimeters per year. The rate and localized nature of the sinking surprised the research team. "Much of the urban development and infrastructure, including parts of the industrial Mapunapuna area, is built on sediments and artificial fill," said Murray. "We think the majority of subsidence is related to the compaction of these materials over time." "This rate of land subsidence is faster than the long-term rate of sea level rise in Hawai'i (1.54 millimeters per year since 1905), which means those areas will experience chronic flooding sooner than anticipated," said Phil Thompson, study co-author and director of the UH Sea Level Center in SOEST. "In places like the Mapunapuna industrial region, subsidence could increase flood exposure area by over 50% by 2050, while compressing flood preparedness timelines by up to 50 years." The shoreline plays a vital role in sustaining Hawai'i's coastal communities, economy, and infrastructure. The researchers found that sinking rates of certain coastal regions have remained consistent over the past two decades, suggesting that subsidence will persistently exacerbate flooding for parts of the island. If subsidence is not accounted for, urban planning and coastal adaptation strategies may underestimate the urgency of mitigation efforts. "Our research provides critical data that can inform state and county decision-making, helping to improve flood exposure assessments, infrastructure resilience, and long-term urban planning," said Chip Fletcher, co-author, director of CRC, and interim dean of SOEST. "This work directly serves the people of Hawai'i by ensuring that local adaptation strategies are based on the best available science, ultimately helping to protect homes, businesses, and cultural areas."

There are currently around 275,000 glaciers worldwide, in which huge quantities of fresh water are stored. But this reservoir is increasingly shrinking. Since the turn of the millennium, glaciers around the world -- i.e. ice masses on land excluding the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets -- have lost around 273 billion tonnes of ice per year. This corresponds to about five and a half times the volume of Lake Constance. Overall, the world's glaciers have lost around five per cent of their total volume since the year 2000. This is the conclusion reached by an international research team of which Tobias Bolch from the Institute of Geodesy at Graz University of Technology (TU Graz) is a member. The team published the corresponding, comprehensive study today in the scientific journal Nature. It is striking that ice loss has accelerated significantly in recent years. In the second half of the period under investigation (2012 to 2023), it was 36 per cent higher than in the period from 2000 to 2011. For their study, the researchers collected, homogenised and evaluated glacier data from different sources, including field measurements directly on glaciers as well as radar, laser and gravimetric data from numerous satellite missions. "We compiled 233 estimates of regional glacier mass changes from about 450 data contributors organised in 35 research teams," explains Michael Zemp, who led the study. Tobias Bolch adds: "The data from ESA Earth observation satellites, as well as from other international space organisations, is particularly important for our research. By analysing this data -- measurements of elevation changes are particularly valuable here -- we were able to determine the condition of glaciers worldwide." The result is a unique time series of annual glacier mass changes in the years from 2000 to 2023 for all glacier regions of the world. Due to the large amount of precise data, this study is much more reliable than previous studies of global glacier changes, which were based on less accurate or incomplete data. 18 millimetres sea level rise The loss of ice from the glaciers since 2000 has led to a rise in sea level of 18 millimetres. This makes the melting of glaciers the second strongest driver of sea level rise after ocean warming, well ahead of the mass loss of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets. Strong regional differences However, not all glacier regions are affected to the same extent. While the glaciers of the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic islands have only lost 1.5 per cent of their mass, they have shrunk the most in the Alps and the Pyrenees, at around 39 per cent. "Due to their low altitude, they are particularly affected by the higher temperatures," explains Tobias Bolch. "Additionally, the Alpine and Pyrenean glaciers are comparatively small, which is also a disadvantage. Glaciers generally have a cooling effect on the microclimate of their surroundings. However, this effect is only weakl for small glaciers, which is another reason why the glaciers in the Alps and Pyrenees are shrinking the most." Declining meltwater supply in Alpine streams Valuable freshwater supplies are being lost with the ice from the glaciers. Paradoxically, this is not yet noticeable in many of the world's glacier-fed rivers; the water volumes from glacier melt have actually increased in most cases. However, these outflows will peak in the future and then decline steadily. "In the European Alps, we have already exceeded this peak discharge. Hence our glaciers will supply the rivers with less and less water," says Tobias Bolch. "This is becoming a problem especially during longer dry periods. Glacier tributaries are then particularly important as continuous water suppliers. This stabilising effect is increasingly being lost." The study on the development of glaciers was carried out as part of the ESA-supported research initiative "Glacier Mass Balance Intercomparison Exercise (GlaMBIE)." GlaMBIE is coordinated by the World Glacier Monitoring Service (WGMS) hosted at the University of Zurich in collaboration with the University of Edinburgh and the company Earthwave. The animation illustrates the different observation methods at the example of Vatnajökull in Iceland and shows the combined results of glacier mass changes from 2000 to 2023 for all glacier regions worldwide. (Animation by Planetary Visions) https://www.esa.int/ESA_Multimedia/Videos/2025/02/Revealed_glacier_ice_loss_over_two_decades/

Their work shows that salt marshes store approximately 10 million cars' worth of carbon in their top meter of soil and suggests that saltmarshes add approximately 15,000 additional cars' worth every year. The results, published in the Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences , are an important step toward meeting the challenges of a warming world. The ocean stores nearly a third of industrial carbon dioxide emissions, and there is a growing global appreciation for the role that coastal ecosystems like salt marshes play as carbon sinks. "The amazing thing about tidal marshes, from a climate perspective," says Wenxiu Teng, lead author of the paper and a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Earth, Geographic and Climate Sciences (EGCS) at UMass Amherst, "is that they can continuously increase their carbon storage. They don't fill up." This is because wave-by-wave, tide-by-tide, storm-by-storm, new layers of carbon-trapping sediment are continually stored in the thick salt marsh grasses. Furthermore, as glaciers continue to melt, salt marshes grow vertically in order to keep up with rising sea levels, thus storing even more carbon. "Salt marshes are far more persistent carbon sinks than forests or other terrestrial sites," says Brian Yellen, Massachusetts's state geologist, research assistant professor at UMass Amherst and one of the paper's coauthors. "There are many people who are excited about technological solutions to scrub carbon from the atmosphere, but here we have a natural one that works, and works very well, right now. Our work helps to clarify the size of this natural carbon sink and provides a method that is scalable to other regions of the world." The team's work also holds a warning -- that 10 millions cars' worth of carbon is also a potential carbon bomb. If the salt marshes are disturbed or their natural processes altered, they could release all those greenhouse gasses, exacerbating climate change, rather than helping to naturally mitigate it. "If salt marshes were to degrade due to the combined threats of local environmental stressors and global climate change," says Yellen, "they would become huge sources of carbon emissions." To figure out how much blue carbon salt marshes can hold, scientists need both a baseline for how much has already been stored and an accurate way to measure the rate at which the marshes can sequester carbon. Both have been very difficult to pinpoint, in part because marshes themselves are highly variable ecosystems with diverse storage rates. The ideal would be to take a soil sample from every meter of every marsh and measure the carbon stored in it -- a prohibitively expensive and time-consuming process. Another option would be to turn to satellite images, but, notes Qian Yu, EGCS associate professor and one of the paper's co-authors, satellites, powerful as they are, can't see the carbon stored in the salt marsh's sediment itself. However, satellites can see variable water depth and vegetation across the marsh, the two main factors that driving marsh soil formation and carbon storage. The team used a common tool from the satellite remote sensing world called the Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI) to look at spatial patterns of water depth and vegetative vigor to map out soil differences across marshes. Yet, the NDWI constantly fluctuates with seasonal vegetation growth and tidal changes. What the team realized it needed to do was to compare satellite NDWI data from multiple seasons and different tidal levels against a robust sample of salt marsh sediment gathered in the field -- which they had already done, travelling to 19 sites from Long Island Sound to the Gulf of Maine and collecting 410 samples representing multiple locations in each salt marsh. "We started looking at the satellite data plotted against the field samples, and we had this 'a-ha!' moment," says Yellen. The team could clearly see that there were particular tidal conditions and times of year where the satellite data closely tracked the data they had gathered in the field. "It's really all about inundation at high-tide -- that's when you want the satellite to capture the picture," says Yellen. Once the team knew what type of satellite images were the most reliable, they could find the specific ones focused on the Northeastern coast and use them to generate the most accurate estimate yet of just how much blue carbon these marshes have stored and are continuing to store. "Salt marshes alone can't account for all the carbon that we're currently releasing into the atmosphere," says Yellen, "but if we are going to achieve carbon neutrality in the future, salt marshes can help offset the hardest parts of the economy to decarbonize. We just need to be sure that we protect them in the meantime." "These salt marshes are crucially important ecosystems for all sorts of reasons," says Teng. "Now we know that they're rich not only in terms of biodiversity, but also in terms of helping the planet to weather the worst of climate change." EGCS professor Jon Woodruff and Bonnie Turek, who contributed to this research as part of her graduate work at UMass Amherst, are also coauthors. This research was supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Geological Society and the Department of the Interior's Northeast Climate Adaptation Science Center.

The study, "A Collaborative Climate Vulnerability Assessment of California Marine Fishery Species," was led by Timothy Frawley, an assistant project scientist at UC Santa Cruz's Institute of Marine Sciences, and Mikaela Provost, an assistant professor in UC Davis's Department of Wildlife, Fish, and Conservation Biology. The study was done in close collaboration with CDFW, fisheries scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and individuals from the Nature Conservancy and California Ocean Protection Council. "The results are striking," said Frawley, who's based in Monterey with the ecosystem-science division of NOAA's Southwest Fisheries Science Center. "Some of California's most economically and culturally important fisheries are assessed as being among the most vulnerable to projected future environmental changes." Prior to earning his Ph.D. in marine biology, Frawley spent five years as a commercial fisherman in California, Alaska, and Maine. So the potential threat is palpable for him, and he knows all too well how serious the impact of dispersed or greatly diminished fisheries would have on local economies and communities. Annually, regional fishing fleets land over 8,200 tons of Dungeness crab, contributing an average over $45 million dollars to local and regional coffers each year. While this crab fishery remains one of California's top commercial harvests, other fisheries ranked as highly vulnerable have already experienced significant declines. The recreational fishery for red abalone, which at one time was estimated to provide $24 to $44 million in annual value, has been closed since 2018; while the biomass supporting the San Francisco Bay Pacific herring fishery -- which once attracted more than 400 boats -- has declined by more than 75% as commercial operations have largely ceased. "While overall across the Northeast Pacific, a species like Pacific Herring may do OK, try telling that to a herring fisherman based out of San Francisco Bay. If their resource moves hundreds of miles away, it's a big deal to them," Frawley said. "It's important to do these assessments at a scale that provides results that will be practical at the local level. So in that respect, this represents a step forward." Species sensitivity to climate changes In their study, the researchers evaluated the sensitivity and exposure of 34 fish and invertebrate species to projected changes in ocean conditions in California waters over two time periods to assess climate vulnerabilities: in the near future (2030-2060) and further out (2070-2100). By identifying relative vulnerabilities across this set of diverse species, the team sought to provide a foundation for integrating climate change into CDFW management and research priorities. The study assessed vulnerability based on two key components: Sensitivity based on species-specific biological traits like reproductive rate, habitat range, and susceptibility to ocean acidification. Exposure to projected oceanographic changes, including sea surface temperature, salinity, acidification, upwelling, subsurface oxygen levels, and sea-level rise. Vulnerability varied by species. Similar to the scenario regarding Pacific herring, market squid may shift north to colder waters off Oregon or Washington state, threatening significant disruption to local California fisheries. Other species, like Pacific bonito, may actually benefit from warming waters, expanding their range into the California Current. Identifying the Most Vulnerable Species The study categorizes species into four vulnerability levels: blue (least vulnerable), yellow, orange, and red (most vulnerable). Because red abalone are benthic (i.e., bottom-dwelling) species with limited mobility and are acutely susceptible to extreme events like marine heatwaves, these prized mollusks are classified as highly vulnerable. Over the longer time horizons -- as the impacts of ocean acidification, sea level rise, and other stressors are expected to intensify -- additional species such as Pacific herring, Dungeness crab, Pismo clam, and pink shrimp also fall into the red category. Other species of concern include market squid and the California spiny lobster which, respectively, generate about $43.9 million and $10.7 million annually for the state's economy. The classification system provides a clear, intuitive framework for fisheries managers, enabling them to prioritize conservation and adaptation efforts. "My experience working as a fisherman has inspired me to focus my work as a marine scientist on supporting coastal communities by providing them with information required to better navigate risk and uncertainty," Frawley said. "My time at sea impressed upon me the links and feedbacks between environmental variability and change and marine-resource-dependent industries and communities, as well as an appreciation for fisheries as a team sport." Fishermen are often thought of as fiercely independent individuals. But Frawley said that's not entirely true. "To make the gears turn, it requires a team of individuals working together on deck, groups of boats sharing information; dock workers and truck drivers to unload and transport the product; buyers and processors to package and market it; and managers and scientists to set the harvest levels and ensure that operations are sustainable," he said. The research team also included Stephanie Brodie and Mercedes Pozo Buil from UC Santa Cruz. They were joined by Lyall Bellquist, from the Nature Conservancy and Scripps Institution of Oceanography; Noah Ben-Aderet from the California Ocean Protection Council; Michael Jacox, Steven Bograd, and Elliott Hazen, all from NOAA's Southwest Fisheries Science Center; Huff McGonigal from Fathom Consulting, and CDFW's Kirsten Ramey. This work was funded by a grant from the Resource Legacy Fund.

The team from the University of Waterloo modeled Antarctica's subglacial environment. The dataset represents the researchers' best approximation of what the water flow underneath the ice sheet might currently look like. The results include numerous subglacial lakes developing below ice streams in both East and West Antarctica, and an extensive network of subglacial water channels that discharge large fluxes of water under many major glaciers. The model calculates how fast subglacial water is flowing and where it accumulates below the ice. It will significantly enhance the scientific community's ability to accurately predict sea level rise from climate change. "Sea level rise will have negative consequences for us all," said Dr. Shivani Ehrenfeucht, post-doctoral fellow in the Faculty of Environment. "It is important for projections of sea level rise to be as accurate as possible so that policy makers and stakeholders can plan and adapt while we as a society strive to reach zero emissions as quickly as possible." Before this continent-wide representation of the Antarctic subglacial environment, scientists had to estimate the water's impact, but often this important factor would not be part of projections. "The water layer between the ice sheet and the bedrock is either entirely ignored in projections of sea level rise or modelers have to make an approximation as to what this layer should look like," said Dr. Christine Dow, professor in the Faculty of Environment and Canada Research Chair in Glacial Hydrology and Ice Dynamics. "Now we've provided the dataset as a product so there's no excuse any more for not including this really important aspect of ice behaviour." Studies that include this water layer in their models of glacier flow end up predicting much higher degrees of glacier melt and mass loss by the end of the century. At nearly 14 million square kilometres, the Antarctic Ice Sheet covers nearly all of the continent and is nearly one and a half times the size of Canada.

Led by PhD student Mahendran Sithamparam of the Space Science Center (ANGKASA), Institute of Climate Change, National University of Malaysia as the first author and co-supervised by ELSI's Specially Appointed Associate Professor Tony Z. Jia and ANGKASA Research Scientist Kuhan Chandru, the study explored the formation of these microdroplets under conditions more reflective of early Earth. The team found that polyester microdroplets could form even in salt-rich environments, at low αHA concentrations, and in small reaction volumes. This expands on previous research, which primarily considered their formation at high concentrations or in larger bodies of water such as coastal areas of lakes or hot springs. The findings suggest instead that polyester protocells were likely more widespread than previously thought, potentially forming in confined spaces like rock pores or even in high-salt environments such as briny pools or oceanic environments. In 2019, the research team discovered that polyester microdroplets could form through a simple dehydration process. When gently heated to 80°C, phenyllactic acid (PA), a type of αHA, transitioned into a gel-like substance that subsequently formed membraneless droplets when rehydrated. In their latest study, the researchers investigated whether these microdroplets could form under more dilute or lower volume conditions, similar to those expected on prebiotic Earth. "Earlier laboratory tests often used high initial concentrations and volumes of αHAs in the hundreds-of-millimolar or microliter range, respectively, which may not reflect the conditions on prebiotic Earth, where such conditions were unlikely; this is why we needed to push the limits of the polymerisation droplet assembly processes to see whether assembly of such protocells would have actually been viable on early Earth," explains Jia. To simulate these more realistic conditions, the researchers reduced the concentration and volume of PA in synthesis and subsequent droplet formation studies. They found that polyesters could be synthesised and droplets could form with as little as 500 µL of 1 mM PA or 5 µL of 500 mM PA. This suggests that polyester microdroplets could have naturally emerged both in confined spaces, such as rock pores, or dilute environments, such as those following flooding or precipitation. To further test real-world conditions, the team simulated reactions in salinities resembling those in the ancient ocean. They introduced 1M NaCl, KCl, and MgCl2 to the PA reactants, finding that polyester synthesis and microdroplet assembly could proceed in NaCl and KCl but not in MgCl2. This suggests that polyester microdroplets would have been more likely to form in water bodies with specific salt compositions, such as those high in NaCl and KCl but low in MgCl2, favourable to αHA polymerisation and subsequent polyester microdroplet assembly. "The conclusions of this study clearly show that polyester protocells were likely more common on early Earth than previously thought and also informs the next generation of laboratory studies of the system," says Chandru. "Thus, a wide range of primitive environments -- including oceanic, freshwater, briny, and confined spaces like rock pores -- could have ultimately supported the formation of these protocells both on Earth or elsewhere." This research was made possible through the ELSI Visitor Program, which fosters international collaboration involving ELSI researchers; this program supported Sithamparam on two separate visits to ELSI in 2023, as well as a visit during summer 2023 to ELSI for graduate student Ming-Jing He (National Central University) to complete experiments for her master's thesis. All experiments were conducted at ELSI, and the findings are featured in the ACS Bio & Med Chem Au Special Issue, 2024 Rising Stars in Biological, Medicinal, and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, of which Jia is an awardee.

The device, dubbed the Underwater Zooplankton Enhancement Light Array (UZELA), is an autonomous, programmable underwater light that works to draw in nearby zooplankton, microscopic organisms that coral feed on. After testing the submersible on two species of coral native to Hawaii over six months, researchers found that UZELA could greatly enhance local zooplankton density and increase the feeding rates of both healthy and bleached coral. Importantly, providing coral with greater amounts of food makes them stronger and more likely to be resilient against certain environmental threats, like heat stress or ocean acidification. This result is impressive, especially at a time when rising ocean temperatures are forcing entire coral reefs to the cusp of collapse, said Andrea Grottoli, lead author of the study and a professor of earth sciences at The Ohio State University. "Coral reefs house one-third of all marine species, yet occupy less than 1% of the ocean," she said. "They are disproportionately responsible for ocean health and we're at risk of losing them." The study was recently published in the journal Limnology and Oceanography: Methods . Millions of humans rely on coral reefs, as they support fishing industries and protect coastline communities from dangers like erosion and floods. Unfortunately, many climate models project that at Earth's current rate of warming, these vital coral reefs may be completely devastated by 2050, jeopardizing the complex ecosystems they sustain. Although the technology in this study is only a short-term solution to the environmental threats that coral reefs face, the device will likely be very beneficial to coral restoration efforts, said Grottoli. "Think of it as a band-aid for about a couple decades," she said. "It can protect some corals in some places, sometimes." The team also found that UZELA, which can be powered for half a year on a single battery, could optimize a coral's feeding time by operating for just one hour after dusk. Understandably, artificial lights can disrupt the behavior of other marine animals, so researchers could choose not to use the device year-round. That said, the study emphasizes that corralling zooplankton with this human-made tool doesn't seem to harm the environment or interrupt the flow of other zooplankton in the surrounding area. "If you imagine zooplankton in a column floating above coral, instead of being naturally dispersed, UZELA is just pulling them down, but it's not taking away from the coral beside it," said Grottoli. "We show that if you put the coral close to the light, they benefit from that concentrated zooplankton, and feeding rates go up 10- to 50-fold." This number is equivalent to an 18-68% increase in the amount of metabolic demand that can be met by zooplankton alone, meaning that increased feeding helps supplement a large part of the coral's diet, which successfully leads to an increase in coral survivorship and persistence. "The real intent of this project is to inject new technology and energy into coral restoration success," Grottoli said. "It's something that can be deployed strategically for high-value reefs, or projects that have already had a lot of investment in them." Widely adaptable to various marine environments, UZELA can also easily be serviced by divers once placed in optimal underwater locations. Notably, while the current generation of UZELAs are handmade, the team is working with an Ohio-based engineering company to redesign the technology to make it more manufacturable. Grottoli expects these more enhanced versions will be available within the next one to three years. "We are not mitigating climate change fast enough to save coral, and UZELA is not going to instantly save coral reefs," she said. "But it is an exciting solution that will buy us time as we work toward a more sustainable environment." Other co-authors include Shannon Dixon and Ann Marie Hulver from Ohio State as well as Claire Bardin, Claire Lewis, Christopher Suchocki and Rob Toonen from the University of Hawai'i at Manoa and the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology. The study was supported by the University of Hawai'i Foundation, the National Science Foundation and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

Published in Nature Climate Change , the study takes a deep dive into the scenarios that underpin our understanding of climate risks and shows how understanding trajectories of gender equality is integral to understanding societies' development pathways under climate change. The findings highlight that equal access to education, jobs, and financial services is key for effective implementation of solutions. "The link between gender equality and climate action is so far reaching but has traditionally been neglected in mainstream climate research, especially in relation to mitigation," said lead author Marina Andrijevic, a researcher in the IIASA Energy, Climate, and Environment Program. "Ensuring that women have equal opportunities in decision-making, the labor force, and higher education across all disciplines makes the energy transition easier and more just." A key aspect of the study focuses on the link between climate change mitigation and gender inequality. The shift away from fossil fuels has different effects on different groups. For example, industries like coal mining have been male dominated, with women playing supportive roles in unpaid or informal labor. Moving towards renewable energy presents an opportunity to change this dynamic. With well-planned policies, more women can enter the workforce, and care work can be more evenly distributed, ensuring fairer working conditions for everyone in a cleaner economy. "Our work was inspired by growing evidence that when women lack opportunities, from access to primary schooling to having a say at top levels of government, it weakens the ability of entire societies to respond to crises, such as climate change," Andrijevic says. "By exploring different possible futures, we highlight how social progress plays a crucial role in shaping climate resilience." The authors point out how social norms can also lead to specific challenges for adaptation. For example, women face unique challenges, such as risks to maternal health, undernutrition during droughts, and exposure to diseases while collecting water. At the same time, they are deprived of access to different resources that hamper their adaptive capacity. Meanwhile, men are more likely to suffer from floods and storms, experience work-related heat stress, or face depression and suicide due to drought-related economic hardship. Understanding the relationship between these differential risks and gender inequality is crucial for understanding how hotspots of vulnerability to climate-related risks could be best targeted. The authors emphasize that to fully understand the challenges ahead and what societal capacity is for responding to crises such as climate change, we must study how societies will evolve. They highlight the importance of imagining different possible futures: both those where fairness and opportunity are central, and those of deepening inequalities. The authors have received funding and support from the SPARCCLE project (grant agreement no. 101081364) under the Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme and the European Research Council Consolidator Grant POPCLIMA (grant agreement no. 101002973), also funded by Horizon Europe.

Researchers examined soil core samples taken from two constructed freshwater wetlands and compared them to data from previous studies of the same wetlands over 29 years to determine how well human-made wetlands sequester -- or capture and store -- carbon as they age. Findings showed both wetlands captured similar amounts of carbon over the decades, but neither has shown a net gain or loss since year 15. But their value in sequestering carbon is remarkable, the researchers said. "Wetlands are generally thought of as the kidneys of our world because they can clean water naturally and sequester carbon well," said Jay Martin, a distinguished professor in food, agricultural and biological engineering at The Ohio State University and a co-author of the study. "As we try to combat climate change, they also provide habitat for many species that are important to us." The researchers analyzed data from the Schiermeier Olentangy River Wetland Research Park (ORWRP), a site ideal for long-term study due to the overwhelming amount of environmental data it generated over the past three decades. Previous studies of the park revealed that its soil has shown an increase in carbon levels. But by using detailed measurements taken in the wetland's 29th year post-construction, Martin's team found that wetlands' ability to sequester carbon diminishes as they mature. The study was recently published in the journal Ecological Engineering. Under current conditions, the wetlands have become a stable ecological force, and this equilibrium isn't expected to change anytime soon. "When you first construct a wetland, the initial plant growth is often what causes carbon to be sequestered so quickly," said Daniel Ruane, a former master's student in ecological engineering and the lead author of the study. "But it just isn't possible to have infinite growth." Although there are limits to how much atmospheric carbon artificial wetlands can effectively store, since their carbon sequestration and storage rates are still far greater than other ecosystems, they still represent a potential solution to counter climate change, said Ruane. As a result, future research into the health of the ORWRP is likely to analyze the various plant communities that grow within the area as well as investigate methane emission levels to determine how long the land can function as a carbon sink. "The benefits that wetlands provide are increasingly positive," said Martin. "Our findings emphasize that these ecosystems should be looked at in a better light now than ever before." Due to an increase in urban and agricultural land use, more than 50% of Earth's natural wetlands have disappeared over the last few centuries. This decline has impacted ecosystem services all around the U.S., but most notably in the Midwest, said Martin. In Ohio, for example, projected wetland loss is closer to 90%, jeopardizing many essential processes that humans rely on, like water quality improvement and flood mitigation. This provides even more reason why policymakers should be trying to build and maintain wetland ecosystems, Ruane said. "If we started to create and restore more wetlands now, that could solve a lot of our problems down the road," he said. Co-authors of the study include Michael Brooker and William Mitsch of Ohio State, Blanca Bernal of Greencollar US Inc., Chris Anderson of Auburn University, and Robert Nairn of the University of Oklahoma.

On Oct. 3, 2023, a multi-hazard cascade in the Sikkim Himalaya, India, was triggered by a permanently frozen (permafrost) lateral moraine -- debris from erosion along a glacier -- collapsing into South Lhonak Lake. "A landslide went into a lake and that triggered a wave that eroded a dam at the end of the lake, which resulted in a slurry-like flood for hundreds of kilometres," explains Dr. Dan Shugar, PhD, an associate professor with the Department of Earth, Energy and Environment in the Faculty of Science. Known as a glacial lake outburst flood, it killed at least 55 people, left dozens more missing, damaged agricultural land and destroyed a hydropower dam. The Sikkim flood was declared one of the worst climate-related disasters to have occurred on the continent that year by the World Meteorological Organization's State of the Climate in Asia 2023 report. A new paper in the journal, Science , presents a collaborative effort by scientists, academics, government departments, non-governmental organizations and others to investigate the event. Shugar, a geomorphologist who's a co-author on the paper, says it's important to forensically analyse what happened and what can be learned from it as rapid climate warning affects mountain regions around the world. The paper looks at the drivers and causes and assesses the downstream impacts of the hazard cascade using high-resolution satellite imagery, seismic data, meteorological data and field observations. It also explores the triggers of the flood and reconstructs its hydraulic dynamics, evaluates downstream implications and considers the long-term impacts of the event. "The assessment indicates that the high hazard level arises not only from the flood itself but also from the subsequent processes it triggers," says the paper. Dr. Ashim Sattar, PhD, the study's lead author who's an assistant professor in the School of Earth, Ocean and Climate sciences at the Indian Institute of Technology, adds that the Sikkim flood had devastating effects for downstream regions. "This is high time to be building resilience in downstream regions that are exposed to such potentially catastrophic events in the Himalaya," he says in a statement. "The threat of these catastrophic events is growing, urging us to act with urgency in protecting both our environment and communities in the Himalaya and similar regions around the world." Sattar says glacial lakes are growing in number and size, so they need to be critically and urgently evaluated for downstream hazards and damage potential. "Climate change is leading to changes in permafrost temperatures, increasing the risk of slope failures that can lead to avalanches or trigger glacial lake outburst floods in the high mountains." In Canada, for example, a glacial lake outburst flood in British Columbia's southern Coast Mountains destroyed forest and salmon spawning habitat in November 2020. Shugar, who has studied both events, says they can have serious implications for people and infrastructure. "This study (on the Sikkim flood) is a good example of a mountain disaster galvanizing the global Earth science research community to work together on a common goal," he says. "Advances in Earth observation technologies over the last decade have dramatically improved our ability to understand these sorts of events, and ultimately, leading to disaster risk reduction."

The very likely range (90 per cent probability for the event to occur), reported by the NTU team in the scientific journal Earth's Future , complements sea-level rise projections reported by the United Nation's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which only assessed the probability of projections up to a likely range (66 per cent probability). Current sea-level projections rely on a range of methods to model climate processes. Some include well-understood phenomena like glacier melting, while others incorporate more uncertain events, such as abrupt ice shelf collapse. As a result, these models produce varying projections, making it difficult to estimate reliable extreme sea-level rise. This ambiguity in projections from different methods has prevented the IPCC from providing very likely ranges for sea-level projections -- a valuable standard in managing risk. To overcome this challenge and to address the uncertainties in current sea-level rise projections, NTU researchers developed a new, improved projection method known as the "fusion" approach. This approach combines the strengths of existing models with expert opinions, offering a clearer, more reliable picture of future sea-level rise. Lead author of the study, Dr Benjamin Grandey, Senior Research Fellow at NTU's School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences (SPMS), said, "Our new approach tackles a key issue in sea-level science: different methods of projecting sea-level rise often produce widely varying results. By combining these different approaches into a single fusion projection, we can estimate the uncertainty associated with future sea-level rise and quantify the very likely range of sea-level rise." The research team believes their new method fills a critical gap for reliable information, complementing the IPCC's latest report. The fusion approach: Combining strengths of existing models The interdisciplinary NTU team of physicists and climate scientists created the fusion model by integrating statistical methods with expert judgments. They used data from established projections presented in the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report, which simulate potential future scenarios under different emissions pathways. The researchers combined different classes of projections reported in the IPCC report. They incorporated both 'medium confidence' and 'low confidence' projections, supplemented by expert assessments, to account for poorly understood extreme processes, such as sudden shifts in ice sheet behaviour. A weighting system was applied, prioritising more reliable medium-confidence data while still including lower-confidence projections to address uncertainties. Projections based on this fusion approach suggest that under a low-emissions scenario, global mean sea levels are very likely to rise between 0.3 and 1.0 metres by 2100. The IPCC's likely range projected global mean sea level to rise by 0.3 to 0.6 metres. Under a high-emissions scenario, the NTU fusion model projects global mean sea level will very likely rise between 0.5 and 1.9 metres by 2100. The IPCC likely range projected a rise between 0.6 to 1.0 metres. The broader ranges indicated by the NTU model suggest that previous estimates may have understated the potential for extreme outcomes, with levels possibly rising to 90 cm higher than the upper end of the IPCC's likely range under a high-emissions pathway. Current emissions trends suggest that the world is on a trajectory between the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios. "Our new very likely projections highlight just how large the uncertainties are when it comes to sea-level rise," said Dr Grandey. "The high-end projection of 1.9 metres underscores the need for decision-makers to plan for critical infrastructure accordingly. More importantly, these results emphasise the importance of climate mitigation through reducing greenhouse gas emissions." Co-author, Professor Benjamin Horton, Director, Earth Observatory of Singapore at NTU, said, "This NTU research represents a significant breakthrough in sea-level science. By estimating the probability of the most extreme outcomes, it underscores the severe impacts of sea-level rise on coastal communities, infrastructure, and ecosystems, emphasising the urgent need to address the climate crisis." Why the new projection method matters Accurate projections of sea-level rise are essential for preparing for climate change. The NTU team believes that their new method provides valuable, actionable information for urban planners and governments, helping them plan and implement measures to protect vulnerable communities, especially in extreme sea-level rise scenarios. Co-author, Professor Chew Lock Yue from NTU School of SPMS, said, "By appropriately combining the best available knowledge of sea-level information at different confidence levels into a single fused probability distribution, we have developed a novel way to project the full uncertainty range of future sea-level rise." Co-author, Associate Professor Justin Dauwels, Signal Processing Systems (SPS), Department of Microelectronics at TU Delft, said, "Our new method for projecting the full uncertainty range of future sea-level rise can also be applied for other climate projections and beyond, including coastal flooding risk assessments, infrastructure vulnerability analysis, and economic impact forecasts." This study exemplifies NTU's commitment to advancing climate science research and supporting global sustainability efforts and is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, and National Environment Agency, Singapore under the National Sea Level Programme Funding Initiative (Award No. USS-IF-2020-3). [1] Projection based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report. The IPCC is a United Nations body that provides authoritative scientific assessments on climate change. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/chapter/chapter-9/

Researchers from the University of Toronto analyzed 22 recent studies exploring HIV-related outcomes in the context of climate change and identified several links between extreme weather events and HIV prevention and care. Climate change-related extreme weather events, such as drought and flooding, were associated with poorer HIV prevention outcomes, including reduced HIV testing. Extreme weather events were also linked to increased practices that elevate HIV risk, such as transactional sex and condomless sex, as well as increases in new HIV infection. "Climate change impacts HIV prevention through several mechanistic pathways," says lead author Carmen Logie, Professor at the Factor-Inwentash Faculty of Social Work (FIFSW) at the University of Toronto and the United Nations University Institute for Water, Environment, and Health. "Extreme weather events cause structural damage to health care infrastructure and increase migration and displacement, both of which disrupt access to HIV clinics for prevention and testing. We also see increases in practices that increase HIV risk due to climate change-related resource scarcity." The study also uncovered important implications for HIV care among those already living with HIV, such as reduced viral suppression, poorer treatment adherence, and worse physical and mental wellbeing. "Extreme weather events present new challenges with access to HIV care and treatment adherence," said co-author Andie MacNeil, PhD student at the FIFSW at the University of Toronto. "Multilevel strategies are needed to mitigate the effects of climate change on HIV care, such as long-lasting antiretroviral therapy, increased medication dispensing supplies, and community-based medication delivery and outreach programs." The authors highlighted several important gaps in the existing literature, including the lack of research on specific extreme weather events (e.g., extreme heat, wildfires, hurricanes) and in geographic areas with high climate change vulnerability and increasing HIV rates (e.g., the Middle East and Northern Africa). They also described a persisting lack of knowledge on extreme weather events and HIV among key marginalized populations, including sex workers, people who use drugs, and gender diverse persons, as well as how extreme weather events interact with intersecting forms of stigma. The researchers are hopeful that these findings can help offer ways forward for research, policy, and practice. "Innovative HIV interventions, such as long-acting PrEP, mobile pharmacies and health clinics, and interventions that reduce food and water insecurity may all contribute to improving HIV care during extreme weather events. More research and evaluation is needed to test climate-change informed HIV prevention and intervention strategies," said Logie. "The integration of disaster preparedness and HIV care provides new opportunities to optimize HIV care in our changing climate."

New research, led by scientists at the U.S. National Science Foundation National Center for Atmospheric Research (NSF NCAR), found that warming conditions will increase evaporation of ocean waters and significantly alter atmospheric rivers to the south. Farther north, however, atmospheric rivers will be most influenced by rising temperatures in the ocean and atmosphere. While such differing processes may seem arcane, they will have real-world consequences for millions of people. By 2100, for example, atmospheric rivers that strike the Pacific Northwest could increase flooding risks by temporarily raising the heights of ocean waters as much as three times more than current storms if society continues to emit greenhouse gases at a high rate. Residents of Southern California will also experience higher storm-driven waters, but not to the extent of those living farther north. "On the ground, people will see a different response between the Southern California coast and the Pacific Northwest," said NSF NCAR scientist Christine Shields, a co-lead author of the new study. "It's not a one-size-fits-all situation. You have these regional responses that can be quite different." The study, in Nature Communications Earth & Environment, was by a research team that included co-lead author NSF NCAR scientist Hui Li and additional co-authors from NSF NCAR, Texas A&M University, and Pennsylvania State University. The work was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy and NSF. Rivers in the sky Atmospheric rivers are long and narrow "rivers in the sky" that meander from lower to higher latitudes, transporting enormous amounts of water. The most powerful atmospheric rivers can unleash torrential rains and cause widespread flooding, especially when they stall over vulnerable watersheds. But they're also a vital feature of Earth's hydrological cycle, often delivering needed moisture and replenishing snowpacks. Past research has shown that climate change is likely to make atmospheric rivers larger and stronger, potentially wreaking more havoc on vulnerable communities. As is the case with other types of storms, a warmer climate means the atmosphere can hold more moisture, thereby increasing the amount of precipitation that a storm can release. In the new study, Shields, Li, and their co-authors focused on the impacts of Pacific atmospheric rivers on the upper region of the ocean. They wanted to gain insights into how future storms are likely to affect oceanic variables such as the surface temperature and height and the mixing of waters at different depths. Such variables have implications for fisheries and coastal communities. To simulate future atmospheric rivers, the research team used a high-resolution version of the NSF NCAR-based Community Climate System Model. This enabled them to get an unusually detailed view of atmospheric processes every 25 kilometers (about 16 miles) and an even more detailed view of ocean processes every 10 kilometers (6 miles) -- a simulation so fine that they could recreate individual ocean eddies. The simulations required large amounts of computing, and the scientists ran some of them on the Derecho supercomputer at the NSF NCAR-Wyoming Supercomputing Center. To the surprise of the scientists, the simulations revealed that a warming climate will have greatly varying impacts on atmospheric rivers in different locations along the West Coast -- and, potentially, other regions around the globe. Atmospheric rivers currently are driven in part by the evaporation of ocean waters, which temporarily cools the atmosphere and propels the storms forward. In a warmer world, that process will be amplified for a type of atmospheric river, known as a "Pineapple Express," that plows into Southern California. But atmospheric rivers that crash into Northern California and the Pacific Northwest will begin to be affected instead by warmer temperatures in both the atmosphere and ocean. These temperatures will fuel more powerful storms and lead to a dramatic increase in sea level height for several days as the atmospheric river approaches the coast and makes landfall. Although more research is needed to tease out the reason for these differing effects, Shields noted that atmospheric rivers are affected by varying processes even in the current climate. The Pineapple Express, for example, moves along a subtropical jet of very moist air from Hawaii to Southern California. In contrast, atmospheric rivers to the north are often connected with a less moist polar jet of air. They tend to be windier and more meandering than the Pineapple Express. Regardless of the processes, vulnerable communities on the West Coast can expect the storms to change and become more powerful. "Atmospheric rivers are like tropical cyclones in that they pack powerful winds and carry enormous amounts of water that can devastate local infrastructure," Shields said. "Communities need to understand how they will change in the future so they can adapt and plan." The modeling also showed that the complex downstream and upstream effects of atmospheric rivers on the upper region of the ocean will evolve as the climate warms. "The strong winds and precipitation linked to atmospheric rivers can significantly impact the upper ocean, potentially impacting ocean dynamics and ecosystems over larger spatial scales and longer timescales than the present," Li said. "It is important to understand the influence of atmospheric rivers under the current climate and how they may change in the future."

A new analysis of more than 3,000 studies from around the world reveals that globally, flooding increases preterm births by about 3%. Children who were in utero during a flood event are also more likely to have a low birth weight. Both these outcomes are risk factors for developing chronic health conditions such as asthma and diabetes later in life. The study did not pinpoint the physical mechanisms by which floods might cause preterm births or low birth weights, but research into other disasters suggests stress, disruption and delayed access to health care are likely factors. This analysis shows that flooding "has lifelong impacts," said Julia Gohlke, an environmental health scientist at Virginia Tech who led the research. As climate change is already increasing flooding, this research will help give "a better estimate of what's at stake." Higher waters, lower birth weights Floods can impact human health directly, such as by causing injury or death, or spreading diseases. They can also have less direct impact, including prolonged stress and loss of income. But researchers are still working to understand the full suite of negative impacts on human health. Some studies have suggested that flooding can lead to worse outcomes for pregnant people and their babies, but results have been inconsistent. To get a clearer idea of the impact of flooding on pregnancy, Gohlke and her colleagues analyzed findings from 3,177 studies that collected data on pregnancy length and birth weight and flooding from the 1800s to present. Data varied widely between floods and regions: While some researchers found no impact from flooding on pregnancy, others found compelling evidence that flooding increased the risk for complications during pregnancy and birth. For example, one 2008 study looking at pre-term birth following Hurricane Katerina concluded that a flood had caused around a 230% increase in pre-term births. Altogether, the researchers found that any given flood increases the pre-term birth rate by around 3%, compared to an unflooded region. Around 7% more children who were in utero during a flood event were born with a low birth weight. Stress can last a lifetime Flooding might induce early labor and low birth weight for several reasons, Gohlke said. Stress can induce early labor. For instance, heat waves are linked to more pre-term births, possibly due to dehydration. Something similar might happen during flood events if water supplies are compromised or people must travel long distances on foot to get away from dangerous areas, as people had to in North Carolina due to Hurricane Helene this September. Early births might also increase during floods because people are unable to get to healthcare in time to avoid going into labor. Pre-term birth can be halted if someone has access to healthcare services, but flooded or damaged roads might prevent them from getting there in time. Low birth weights are often associated with pre-term births, but that's not always the case, Gohlke said. People who eat less during pregnancy give birth to babies with lower birth weights, even if they go into labor on schedule. Because flooding can imperil people's access to food, either by destroying crops or blocking access to food supplies, people who are pregnant during flooding might be more likely to give birth to smaller babies. Pre-term birth and low birth weights don't guarantee that a baby will develop neurological issues, obesity or diabetes later in life. But they do increase the risk. With that in mind, emergency services should aim to evacuate pregnant people before flooding events,

In the paper, the researchers urge the climate science community to turn away from an outdated approach to mapping flood hazards known as "bathtub modeling," which is an assumption that floods spread out over areas as a level pool. The technique is often used as a straightforward way to visualize flood impact in coastal areas but, according to the authors, can lead to an oversimplified and less realistic picture of flood risk than more advanced methods. The alternative to bathtub modeling, they say, is dynamical modeling that solves physics-based equations. "Bathtub models can both overpredict and underpredict flooding," said co-author Brett Sanders, UC Irvine Chancellor's Professor of civil & environmental engineering. "One of the biggest causes of error is that bathtub models fail to accurately account for the systems in place to protect people and assets, including storm drains, levees and pumping." He and his collaborators -- Oliver Wing, chief scientific officer at Fathom and an honorary research fellow at the University of Bristol; and Paul Bates, a University of Bristol professor of hydrology and Fathom chairman -- note that bathtub modeling is limited in its ability to account for at least six key factors (see graphic). Those are: flood attenuation from the effects of event dynamics and friction on flood spreading; tidal amplification associated with the resonance of ocean tides within coastal embayments; flood defenses such as levees and floodwalls that may overtop during an extreme event but still restrain the degree of inland flooding; shoaling of the groundwater table; surfacing groundwater from the combined influence of rising sea levels and changing hydrologic budgets; and pumping of groundwater within lands below sea level to mitigate inundation by rising groundwater. Based on a review of literature pertaining to flood risk, the research team summarizes the reduced accuracy of bathtub models using the critical success index, which scores flood extent accuracy between 0 and 1, where 1 represents a perfect match based on field measurements. The CSI for bathtub models analyzed in the literature is consistently under 0.5, well below the threshold of 0.65 that experts suggest models need in order to have local relevance and therefore produce useful results when applied in impact analyses. "CSIs under 0.5 indicate that these models are worse than a random classification," Wing said. "In other words, a chimpanzee has more skill than a bathtub model in delineating flood hazard areas." Studies that rely on bathtub modeling are frequently found in short-format, high-impact journal publications and attract considerable interest from the news media, according to the researchers. While the biases and uncertainties of bathtub modeling are often acknowledged in these technical papers, the message communicated to the public and policymakers -- sometimes with compelling visualizations of cities under water -- is too often an exaggeration, they say. "Accurate maps of areas at risk of flooding are of paramount importance for everyone from home and business owners to insurers, banks and governments," Bates said. "We all have a role to play in reducing flood losses, but it all starts with trustworthy information." Reliable models of flood risk are needed to effectively engage impacted communities in adaptation processes and to implement effective and equitable mitigation and adaptation strategies, according to Sanders. Inaccurate models could lead to maladaptation. "Projections of flooding need to make sense to people, not only for building understanding of what's at risk but also for deciding upon the investments and policies that will be made to manage it," Sanders said. "In fact, numerous research papers have shown that residents within at-risk areas are unlikely to trust projections of future flooding if they don't reflect their lived experiences. Research studies that oversimplify flooding and don't represent real-world data pose a threat to transformative action." This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Natural Environment Research Council in the U.K.

It turns out there's more to weigh than catastrophic environmental change as tipping points draw near, though. Another point to consider, a new study reveals, is the cost of undoing the damage. The cost of reversing the effects of climate change -- restoring melted polar sea ice, for example -- quickly climbs nearly fourfold soon after a tipping point is crossed, according to new work published today in the journal npj Climate and Atmospheric Science . Much work has been done to explore the environmental costs tied to climate change. But this new study marks the first time researchers have quantified the costs of controlling tipping points before and after they unfold. Common examples of Earth's tipping points include melting ice sheets and dwindling tropical coral reefs. As ice melts and reefs die off, drastic environmental effects like flooded coastal cities and lost biodiversity soon follow -- a shared trait among what the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change defines as "critical thresholds in a system that, when exceeded, can lead to a significant change in the state of the system." Despite the well-established dangers of crossing a tipping point, little is known about the cost of controlling them. How much effort would it take to stop and reverse course just before crossing a tipping point? In the case of polar sea ice, which is melting at a pace unrivaled by any period in the past 1,500 years, a reversal would entail halting melt and reestablishing ice cover. But how about after we tip -- how might the cost of intervention change if we wait? Cross a tipping point threshold, said mathematician and lead author Parvathi Kooloth, and it costs nearly four times the effort to reverse the effects and reestablish the climate system to where it was just before tipping, as opposed to reversing course before the threshold. The message applies to most tipping points, said Kooloth, whether they involve tropical coral reefs or frigid sea ice. "You either shoulder the cost now, just before the threshold is crossed," said Kooloth, "or you wait. And if you wait, the degree of intervention needed to bring the climate system back to where it was rises steeply. A key insight from this work is the confirmation that corrective action after the fact is much more costly and intrusive than preventive action." Each tipping point is unique. The physical qualities that determine its behavior -- the extent of cloud cover or, say, the transport of heat in the nearest ocean waters -- determine how post-tipping changes take shape in the climate system. In turn, those qualities dictate the nuts and bolts of an actual intervention strategy. At the heart of each tipping point, however, is a shared, core equation that describes its basic nature. This universality allows researchers like Kooloth to probe the fundamental, shared behavior of tipping points using simplified mathematical models. From their findings, scientists can then glean broad stroke details that could inform future intervention plans and perhaps, as Kooloth hopes, even a way to identify early warning signals that a tipping point is drawing near. "It's actually really hard to pin a tipping point down," said Kooloth. "We know a great deal about the climate system today. But even now we're never really sure how far or close we are to a tipping point. Could we one day use observable precursors to provide early warning? My hope is that we can." The team behind the new study uncovered one other interesting phenomenon: that some tipping points have an "overshoot window." In this window of time just after a tipping point is crossed, the cost of intervention doesn't start its steep climb right away. Instead, cost only grows linearly with time. This can happen because nearby ocean waters take longer to heat up, for example, delaying the onset of rapid change. It's a fortunate thing, Kooloth points out, a gift of additional time before dire changes start piling on. But this is "no free lunch," she adds. The extra leeway comes with an even steeper increase in intervention costs once the overshoot window is fully crossed. The bigger the overshoot window, the mightier the cost. The authors point out that not all effects of climate change are reversible, like flora and fauna lost to rapid and prolonged environmental change. And some effects could demand a great deal of effort to reverse -- even more than the effort it took to push the climate system past a tipping point. There is an asymmetry at play, said Kooloth. We could approach and pass a tipping point rather quickly, but the journey to revert the climate system to where it was could take much, much longer. "The path forward and the path backward are often not the same," said Kooloth. "Imagine that we go down a high-emissions pathway, where the planet warms enough to melt all our sea ice by the end of the century. If we arrive in the year 2100 with no sea ice, it may not be sufficient to bring the ice back if we dialed our emissions down to the levels we're emitting now in 2024, when we still have some ice left. We may need to dial emissions down much further, to levels predating 2024 -- that asymmetry is important for us to consider as we choose our path forward."

From doomscenarios to desired outcomes Due to the climate crisis, urban river deltas are facing hazards such as rising sea levels, extreme weather events, and soil subsidence. Prosperous regions like the Netherlands are facing increasing costs and complexity for improving systems. Deltas in low- and middle-income countries additionally struggle with rapid urbanisation and limited resources. Traditional models are often insufficient to prepare deltas for our unpredictable future, necessitating more flexible approaches. "Fortunately, the scientific community is already showing a greater focus on optimism and visions of the future, which helps to inspire and motivate people." According to Chris and his co-authors, scientists should more often use imagination and 'design-based research'. "Ask the wider society: what do we want our country to look like in 100 years? What do we really care about? And then visualise possible futures." In this way, we encourage civic engagement and make climate adaptation both tangible and motivating. "Ask the wider society: what do we want our country to look like in 100 years? What do we really care about?" Inspiration from the Netherlands Netherlands can serve as a role model for deltas worldwide, according to the authors. ''Take for instance Johan van Veen, visionary designer of the Delta Works," says Chris. "Johan was not thinking in years, but in generations. He had deep knowledge of natural processes such as sedimentation. And when the 1953 North Sea Flood struck, he had an appealing vision of the future ready at hand." Or consider the recent Room for the River programme, which applies natural solutions to increase the capacity of rivers while simultaneously improving biodiversity. These words of praise must come with a caveat. Chris: "Many Dutch people considered the Delta Works a permanent solution, but according to Johan they were always meant as a necessary step in a process. Today, we need a new long-term vision." Fortunately, work is underway on new visions for our coastal areas, including three scenarios for 2100. "Do we want to preserve our current coasts, flexibly adapt to change, or give way completely to the rising sea? This is how we use the power of design and imagination!" "Johan van Veen did not think in years, but in generations; he had deep knowledge of natural processes; and he had an appealing vision for the future." Measures for science, policy, and education The authors offer clear advice to scientists, policymakers, and universities: strengthen the role of design in delta management. Scientists should integrate imagination and interdisciplinary approaches into climate adaptation research. Chris: "Be like Johan van Veen. Unite professional knowledge with long-term thinking, visualisation, and an understanding of nature." Policymakers should invest in vision and creative research, because "after all, these plans will amount to billions of euros when implemented!" And universities should fuel creativity and include 'design thinking' in the curriculum. "We want students with the ability to create and the motivation to realise visions of the future: who seek large-scale and unique solutions."

The study assesses the cumulative impact of multiple climate-driven coastal hazards, including sea level rise, flooding, beach erosion, sinking land, and rising groundwater, all of which are expected to worsen significantly by the end of the 21st century. The scale of these interconnected hazards is much greater than anticipated, said study co-author Manoochehr Shirzaei from Virginia Tech's Department of Geosciences. "The risk of flooding, compounded by sinking land and beach loss, could displace millions and damage critical infrastructure unless robust adaptation strategies are implemented," said Shirzaei. Key findings The study stresses the necessity of a holistic approach to coastal resilience that addresses the full spectrum of climate-related hazards. "We need to rethink how we plan and build for the future, especially in highly vulnerable coastal regions," said Shirzaei. "By including a wider range of climate hazards in resilience strategies, we can better protect our communities from the compounded effects of sea level rise and extreme weather." The study, led by Patrick Barnard of U.S. Geological Survey, was conducted using cutting-edge geospatial data and modeling tools developed in collaboration with academic institutions and government agencies. The researchers employed the Coastal Storm Modeling System and other state-of-the-art models to project potential coastal hazard impacts, providing a crucial resource for informed decision-making.

She went on to lead a study examining the relationship between climate change and conflict, including civil war, which has identified that South America, Oceania, and Southeast Asia are understudied regions. The study, published in WIRES Climate Change , examined over 212 papers on the topic spanning 15 years (2007-2023). It revealed that while researchers have focused on linking climate impacts to the onset of conflict, there has been less attention on how climate impacts affect communities already experiencing conflict or involved in peacebuilding. This is despite the fact that in many communities in Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, and the Philippines, climate-induced impacts such as typhoons, floods, droughts, and coastal erosion are already intensifying socio-political tensions and often triggering or escalating conflicts. The researchers say the findings underscore the need for peacebuilding and efforts to limit climate change in risk-prone regions to be designed to work together, and not in isolation. Crucial perspectives were also missing in most of the reviewed studies on climate change and conflict. "Many of those studies are in English and studies published in Spanish, Portuguese, Tagalog, and other languages are underrepresented in current databases, so we are missing important perspectives and understanding of these situations," said Ms Bedoya Taborda. Researchers warn that this gap could directly impact Australia's humanitarian response by challenging the effectiveness of its economic aid, peacebuilding, and climate adaptation efforts. "Climate-driven instability in neighbouring countries could lead to regional security concerns, migration pressures, and humanitarian crises in Australia, and these areas are under-researched," said Associate Professor Michele Barnes, co-author of this study at the University of Sydney with James Cook University's Professor Tiffany Morrison. "I was helping communities in Colombia that were dealing with climate change impacts like droughts or flooding and simultaneously they were affected by conflict. The same lands that were abandoned or seized, and I was helping to recover, were also intensely impacted by climate change," Ms Bedoya Taborda said. In 2022 she moved to Australia to complete a master's degree at James Cook University, two years later she is commencing a PhD on this topic at the University of Sydney's School of Project Management, Faculty of Engineering. "It's very complicated because we don't actually know how to help communities facing these simultaneous shocks." "Our review showed there is a major gap regarding what's happening in communities that are already affected by conflict. So, these communities are basically alone, trying to face these two significant, compounded shocks," said Ms Bedoya Taborda, who led the study as a master's student. The researchers revealed that climate-induced stress is already exacerbating existing socio-political tensions, often leading to the outbreak or escalation of conflicts. One example the researchers gave was Nepal, in Southern Asia. The country began a peacebuilding process after a 10-year civil war. The peacebuilding process attempted to lessen poverty and improve communities' livelihoods, but Nepal's communities faced significant difficulties due to the persistence of the underlying causes of the civil war combined with climate change impacts. The Midland region was severely deforested, and there was a shortage of wood and food. This type of climate-security-driven crisis in Australia's neighbouring regions could lead to an increased demand for humanitarian aid, migration support and diplomatic and security assistance. "There's an urgent need to study climate change impacts in conflict-affected communities so we can better understand how to design policies and projects that can help address these compounding issues in ways that work toward both climate resilience and enduring peace," said Dr Barnes.

In a new paper, drawing on accounts from nearly three dozen previously incarcerated people, researchers at the University of Colorado Boulder reveal a disturbing story of how prisons and jails in Colorado have failed to provide humane protections from growing environmental hazards brought on by climate change. In many cases, the authors report, inadequate policies and dated infrastructure leave incarcerated people uniquely vulnerable to these harms, such as extreme heat and wildfire smoke. The study was published Oct 13 in the journal Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space . "There are so many harrowing accounts of how this system is built to operate in one way and is not good at changing or responding dynamically," said the paper's first author, Ben Barron, who did the research as a doctoral student in the Department of Geography. "As climate hazards become more frequent and intense, dynamic responses are the only thing that's going to protect these people when their agency is severely limited." The study comes on the heels of multiple reports of Florida and North Carolina prisons failing to evacuate incarcerated people when two deadly hurricanes, Helene and Milton, struck the East Coast. People in those facilities reportedly had no power or running water for days, with sewage overflowing into their cells. Increasing climate risks Studies have shown that climate change is likely to increase the intensity and frequency of extreme climate events. In Colorado, that means people are more likely to experience strong heat waves, winter storms, flooding and poor air quality from wildfires. Barron and a team of experts in engineering, environmental design, and environmental justice set out to study how incarceration facilities cope with increasing climate hazards, an understudied topic in academia. "As an engineer, it's shocking to me how little is included in our education and training about these social injustices and our role in amplifying them," said co-author Shideh Dashti, associate professor in the Department of Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering. "There is a lot of focus on the strength and stability of these facilities and little to no attention to the wellbeing and safety of incarcerated people." In their previous research, the team uncovered that at least three-quarters of Colorado's jails and prisons -- housing over 80% of the state's incarcerated population -- are susceptible to at least one natural disaster in the coming year. About half of the facilities are at risk of extreme heat. To better understand how disaster planning works inside prisons and jails, the team first reached out to carceral facilities. But the authors said none of the facilities responded to the team's interview request. So they decided to speak directly with those who have lived through climate hazards there. Barron interviewed 35 formerly incarcerated individuals from 23 prisons and 15 jails in Colorado. The team found that over 60% of the interviewees said they had direct experience with at least one of the four main climate hazards in Colorado: extreme heat, extreme cold, wildfires and floods. All participants said they had experienced uncomfortable temperatures, poor air quality, or water issues, such as burst pipes and sewage backups. "It's so important to have this opportunity to amplify the voices and experiences of these people, especially in a context where the system is actively trying to keep those stories from being heard," Barron said. The researchers said there have been incidents in which incarceration facilities attempted to cover up conditions by falsifying data, such as indoor temperatures. Failing infrastructure Summer 2024 was the hottest on record in the Northern Hemisphere and the second hottest in Denver. But many prisons and jails lack air conditioning or don't use it properly, the team found. Interviewees mentioned that some facilities only turn on the air conditioning on an arbitrary date that does not correlate with the actual outside temperature. As a result, residents can be stuck in an extremely hot or cold cell for weeks. "That kind of discomfort, over long periods of time, I suppose is a very small form of torture," one interviewee, who spent 34 years incarcerated, told Barron. More than one-third of interviewees experienced at least one wildfire while incarcerated. They described how smoke entered from cracked windows and ineffective ventilation systems and burnt their noses and eyes. People said they were left to breathe soot and ash for days. To date, Colorado has only evacuated one prison due to wildfires. In 2013, the Royal Gorge fire forced a facility in southern Colorado to evacuate 900 incarcerated people to an empty facility. The process was poorly organized and inefficient, according to one interviewee who was evacuated. "These buildings are designed to keep people in, not effectively get them out," said Barron, adding that they were unable to confirm whether the facilities have set evacuation plans. The researchers say their findings reflect a national pattern. In North Carolina, where torrential rain from Hurricane Helene inundated the western part of the state, individuals held in several incarceration facilities reported living without light or running water for days, with some forced to sleep in rooms where toilets overflowed with feces. Similarly, several jails and prisons in Florida refused to evacuate their residents ahead of Hurricane Milton, despite mandatory evacuation orders issued for the areas. "The fact that in the U.S. someone could be arrested for abandoning a dog in a flood, but nobody's being held accountable when human beings are left in jail cells when water rises, is a huge contradiction in our system," said co-author Phaedra Pezzullo, professor in the Department of Communication. A difficult battle Some study participants said that they could be punished for filing complaints about their living conditions. Many of them came up with their own solutions. For example, some intentionally flooded their cells to cool down in the water. Others used cardboard and plastic to block cracks in the windows and keep wildfire smoke out. The team hopes the study will inspire more research around climate change adaptation, mitigation and prevention while considering these underheard voices. The researchers note that some state legislators are already working to improve conditions inside incarceration facilities, but progress often hits roadblocks, partly due to differing opinions on what punishment should look like. "Even if we fully agree that the response to a crime is that you should be locked in a cell for a certain amount of time, nowhere in the law does it say you should be exposed to poor air quality, extreme temperatures, or the risk of living in sewage water for a week," Barron said. "These vastly exceed unreasonable, disproportional punishment."

This is according to a new study from the University of Michigan's School for Environment and Sustainability. "It's a very worrying confluence that does keep me up," said Joshua Newell, a professor with the school's Center for Sustainable Systems and senior author of the study. "The communities that are most at risk of catastrophic flooding are the least prepared and the least likely to get prepared." He has termed this three-fold susceptibility "triple exposure." The first factor in this exposure is that the Federal Emergency Management Agency has underestimated the flooding risks in many counties across the country. Secondly, markers of social vulnerability, such as low income and mobility limitations, hamper the ability of individuals to take preventative measures, evacuate before floods and recover and rebuild after a flooding event. Lastly, in certain communities, there's a pervasive skepticism that climate change is happening at all. "It's not just the flooding, it's not only that it's affecting socially vulnerable populations, there is also an extra layer of vulnerability in that people are unprepared and unaware of the risk they are facing," said Dimitrios Gounaridis, a U-M research specialist and co-author of the new report. Geographically, the team found that triple exposure was most pronounced in Appalachia, an area devastated by flooding following Hurricane Helene. The team's study was in the final stages of review before its publication when Helene made landfall in the U.S. "Unfortunately, this paper has become timely," Gounaridis said. The areas hit hardest by the floods caused by Hurricane Helene, including Asheville, North Carolina, were just west of the Appalachian triple exposure hotspot the researchers found. But the team said the disaster underscores how dangers become magnified when people don't fully appreciate their risks. "Asheville was supposed to be a climate haven," Newell said -- a location that would be insulated from the worst consequences of climate change. "It's clear from our paper that it, or at least the region around it, is not. I think this really highlights the need for preparation in these high-risk areas and the urgency of doing that work." To identify areas facing triple exposure, the team combined what Gounaridis characterized as dozens of layers of data. That included results from a national Yale University survey on climate attitudes, data from a federal social vulnerability index and household level flood risk estimates from the nonprofit First Street Foundation, which is regarded as more modern and robust than FEMA's. This not only revealed areas facing outsized flood risks, but also opportunities to help communities in those regions bolster their preparedness and resilience, said Wanja Waweru, who worked on the project while earning her master's degree at U-M. "That could be education campaigns to help folks better understand climate change or policies that help lift people out of poverty so they can have the extra funds in their pockets to evacuate or rebuild after a disaster," she said. "I think agencies and organizations in these areas should continue their efforts to help folks understand their risks. Hopefully, this research can illuminate ways to meet them where they are."

For years, scientists have warned that unchecked Arctic warming could lead to devastating consequences, threatening wildlife and ushering in an era of more frequent and extreme weather events. Amid concerns for these types of outcomes, a study led by UC Riverside offers some limited relief. The study, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , examined the effects that the slowing of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, or AMOC, may have on the climate in the Arctic. The AMOC is the current that transports heat from the tropics to higher latitudes. Though temperatures in the Arctic are projected to rise by 10 degrees Celsius by the end of the century, the study shows that when the slowing AMOC current is factored in, Arctic temperatures will only rise by 8 degrees Celsius. "The AMOC is a critical component of our climate system because it moves heat around the globe," said Yu-Chi Lee, UCR graduate student in Earth and Planetary Sciences and first author of the study. "We found that its weakening reduces the amount of heat reaching the Arctic, which slows down the rate of warming." Despite this potential benefit, the study highlights ongoing concerns for Arctic ecosystems. As sea ice melts, polar bears face habitat loss, which could make it more difficult for them to hunt and survive. Moreover, as the ice disappears, darker open water is exposed, which absorbs more sunlight and further accelerates warming through a process called the albedo effect. While the slowdown may slightly reduce Arctic warming, the researchers caution that it may cause other climate disruptions. One of the most concerning is a potential shift in the Intertropical Convergence Zone, a tropical rain belt. If this rain belt moves southward, regions that depend on its rainfall could experience more frequent droughts, affecting agriculture and water supplies. There are also misconceptions about the connection between sea ice and rising sea levels. Melting sea ice doesn't directly cause sea levels to rise because the ice is already in the water, much like how melting ice cubes in a glass won't cause it to overflow. However, land ice, such as glaciers, and the expansion of water as it heats up, do contribute to rising sea levels. The AMOC slowdown isn't a major factor in sea level rise, but it brings other significant changes to the climate system. Wei Liu, UC Riverside associate professor of climate change and co-author of the paper, emphasized the complexity of the AMOC's role in the global climate. "The AMOC slowdown may offer some temporary relief in the Arctic, but this is not a simple good-news story," Liu said. "The overall impact on ecosystems and weather patterns, both in the Arctic and globally, could still be severe." The research team used a coupled climate model, which integrates interactions between the ocean, atmosphere, land, and sea ice. The researchers isolated the effect of the AMOC by running two simulations: one that allowed the AMOC to slow under the influence of rising greenhouse gases, and another that artificially maintained its strength by removing fresh water from the North Atlantic to increase salinity. "Our simulations allowed us to clearly see how much of the future Arctic warming is tied to the AMOC slowdown," Lee said. "Even though the slowdown reduces warming by a couple of degrees, the overall effects on Arctic ecosystems and the global climate system remain severe." Lee also emphasized that the slowdown began relatively recently, and there's still debate among scientists about how long it has been happening and whether it will continue. "Direct, in-situ observations of AMOC strength began around 2004, so it's a relatively short timeframe from which to draw long-term conclusions," she said. "But there are studies suggesting it could collapse by the end of this century, which would have huge implications." Looking ahead, Lee remains focused on the bigger picture. "While the AMOC slowdown might provide some short-term benefits, its broader impacts show us that even small shifts in ocean circulation can cause ripple effects across the planet. Climate change is far from a one-region issue," she said. "The future of the Arctic -- and the world -- depends on how we respond today."

In fact, new research from the Stevens Institute of Technology shows, during four recent major hurricanes, important public safety messaging was drowned out by more trivial social content -- including people tweeting about pets, sharing human-interest stories, or bickering about politics. That's a big problem for officials working to understand where help is needed and to communicate effectively with people impacted by disasters, says Dr. Jose Ramirez-Marquez of the Stevens School of Systems and Enterprises. "It's like being at a crowded party -- if everyone's arguing loudly about politics, it's hard to make yourself heard over the noise," he explains. Working with Stevens PhD candidate Yefang Liang, Dr. Ramirez-Marquez analyzed messages posted on X during each of four recent hurricanes -- Harvey, Imelda, Laura, and Florence -- and identified the clusters of tweets that attracted the most attention and engagement before, during, and after the storms. Their findings, published this week in the International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, show that in many cases the topics that generated the most intense online interest were completely unrelated to safety messaging or rescue work. During Hurricane Harvey, for instance, 24 of the 50 most active topics involved discussion of dogs affected by flooding. By contrast, just seven of the 50 most active topics involved public safety messages. "That's obviously a problem if you're a public official trying to ensure people know how to keep themselves safe during a storm," Dr. Ramirez-Marquez says. Similar patterns played out during other storms, too. During Hurricane Florence, more than half of high-engagement topics involved either animal-related chatter or political arguments, while just 19 out of the top 50 topics involved rescue or public safety messages. During Hurricane Imelda, meanwhile, debates about climate change accounted for almost one-quarter of all high-engagement topics, drowning out higher-stakes safety messages. "This really is zero-sum: if conversations about animals or politics are taking up all the oxygen, it's that much harder for other, potentially more important messages to break through," Dr. Ramirez-Marquez warns. The team's research does suggest some ways that officials can maximize the chances of safety messages reaching a broad audience. Descriptive messaging about storms tends to outperform safety messages, for instance -- so combining the two, and weaving public safety notifications or warnings into more descriptive social-media posts, might help to boost the reach of such messages. "It's also important that officials stay focused during disasters, and don't inadvertently get drawn into political conversations that could distract from their core messaging," Dr. Ramirez-Marquez adds. The reality, though, is that using social media to support safety and recovery efforts in the wake of natural disasters will remain challenging, because many users enjoy engaging with content that doesn't serve a public safety function. To overcome that, social networks themselves would likely need to step in. Actively amplifying official disaster-related messaging for users in affected communities, for instance, might help ensure that such people get the information they need while still allowing users in other areas to chat freely about unrelated topics. More broadly, the study highlights the fragility of social-media communities. While the current study focused on the impact of harmless chatter, Dr. Ramirez-Marquez notes, bad actors can also deliberately hijack or distort online conversations by spreading enticing but false information. "As we've seen in recent weeks, with the misinformation surrounding natural disasters in Florida, Georgia, and North Carolina, social networks remain highly vulnerable to misinformation," Dr. Ramirez-Marquez says. To remedy that, social networks could potentially work to create mechanisms that help users determine who to trust online, or that make it easier to filter out distracting or false information during disasters. "The key here is that the networks themselves will need to take the lead on rebuilding trust online," Dr. Ramirez-Marquez says. "This isn't a problem that government officials can solve on their own."

Smart CCTV systems trained to spot blockages in urban waterways could become an important future tool in flood prevention, new research published today has found. Researchers at the University of Bath have shown that their AI-enabled detection software, 'AI on The River' trained to accurately detect natural debris, litter or waste blocking trash screens mounted in culverts, can be integrated to existing CCTV systems to provide an early warning of likely flooding. Culverts, which number over 1 million in the UK and are in almost every city, town or built-up area, allow streams and rivers to flow under roads, railway embankments and housing developments, meaning they are an important but hidden part of waterways and infrastructure. Trash screens, usually a set of bars, are mounted at culvert entrances to stop debris from passing through. When a culvert trash screen is blocked, flooding can happen quickly. If the flow of water into a culvert is restricted, it can build up and pool, leading to risks to the structural integrity of the waterway and the local environment. Helping flood defences worldwide The machine learning process created by the team is already attracting attention from flood prevention organisations in countries including South Africa, where monitoring equipment is available but data that could be used to train an AI to do the same job is scarce or not collected. Dr Andrew Barnes, a lecturer in Bath's Department of Computer Science and a member of the Centre for Climate Adaptation & Environment Research, and the team that developed the software underpinning the early warning system. He said: "We've been able to develop an efficient model that can capture and identify blockages before they become a problem -- it's proactive, so doesn't wait for a flood to happen before raising the alarm. "We've developed the system to be flexible and scalable -- it could be applied almost anywhere, giving it huge potential in countries where flooding is an issue but where the resources to develop similar tools locally may be scarce." Identifying blockages with high accuracy Focusing on a culvert site in Cardiff, the team used machine learning to train a camera system to automatically spot potential obstructions, resulting in it being able to identify likely blockages with close to 90% accuracy. In most cases in the UK, culverts are monitored manually over CCTV by local authority staff watching a bank of screens. Using AI and machine learning to create early warning systems would allow local authorities in charge of keeping waterways flowing to focus resources where they are needed and respond to potential blockages quickly and in a focused way. The proactive nature of the system also offers major safety benefits to response teams, as they can attend sites immediately rather than having to work in dangerous flooded conditions. Dr Thomas Kjeldsen, a Reader in Bath's Department of Architecture & Civil Engineering and a member of the Centre for Regenerative Design and Engineering for a Net Positive World (RENEW), added: "Climate change means the risk of flooding is growing all around the world. This work opens the potential for the development of new, light weight and cost-efficient flood management systems in urbanised areas, enabling authorities around the globe to adapt to the changing climate. This study is a first step toward a sustainable solution to flood forecasting, and it has opened a multitude of areas for exploration and exploitation."

Low- and middle-income countries are disproportionately impacted by climate change's acute (e.g., flooding) and chronic (e.g., rising sea levels) effects. Countries undergoing climate shocks are more likely to see increased intimate partner violence against women, possibly because climate disasters reaffirm the gender-based economic disparities. Mannell and colleagues analyzed 363 nationally representative surveys from 156 countries to estimate the prevalence of intimate partner violence, defined as physical or sexual violence against a woman from her partner in the last year. Each survey represented one year of data for its respective country encompassing 1993-2019. Most countries had five or fewer years represented. The researchers analyzed this data against climate shock data from the Emergency Events Database, filtering for eight events linked to climate change: earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, extreme temperatures, droughts, floods, storms and wildfires. They observed a lagged association between landslides, storms and floods (together, a hydro-meteorological climate variable) and intimate partner violence, with the association taking place two years following the climate event. The researchers observed that this climate variable had a similar magnitude of effect on intimate partner violence to GDP, suggesting that "the association … may be similar to economic drivers of violence." Higher GDPs were generally associated with fewer instances of intimate partner violence. These results have implications for future environmental policies designed to mitigate the social and health impacts of climate change and "progress current efforts to … consider the enormous implications of climate-related [intimate partner violence] on women's lives." The researchers encourage investigation into the differences between types of intimate partner violence as associated with climate events, long-term versus short-term impact and distinctions among countries and regions. The authors add: "Recognizing the impacts that climate change has on intimate partner violence is critical, and countries can address this by implementing it into their Nationally Defined Contributions (NDCs) in support of The Paris Agreement."

To address the problem, the federal government instituted a program in 1990 that helps reduce flood insurance costs in communities enacting measures to better handle flooding. If, say, a town preserves open space as a buffer against coastal flooding, or develops better stormwater management, area policy owners get discounts on their premiums. Studies show the program works well: It has reduced overall flood damage in participating communities. However, a new study led by an MIT researcher shows that the effects of the program differ greatly from place to place. For instance, higher-population communities, which likely have more means to introduce flood defenses, benefit more than smaller communities, to the tune of about $4,000 per insured household. "When we evaluate it, the effects of the same policy vary widely among different types of communities," says study co-author Lidia Cano Pecharromán, a PhD candidate in MIT's Department of Urban Studies and Planning. Referring to climate and environmental justice concerns, she adds: "It's important to understand not just if a policy is effective, but who is benefitting, so that we can make necessary adjustments and reach all the targets we want to reach." The paper, "Exposing Disparities in Flood Adaptation for Equitable Future Interventions in the USA," is published today in Nature Communications . The authors are Cano Pecharromán and ChangHoon Hahn, an associate research scholar at Princeton University. Able to afford help The program in question was developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which has a division, the Flood Insurance Mitigation Administration, focusing on this issue. In 1990, FEMA initiated the National Flood Insurance Program's Community Rating System, which incentivizes communities to enact measures that help prevent or reduce flooding. Communities can engage in a broad set of related activities, including floodplain mapping, preservation of open spaces, stormwater management activities, creating flood warning systems, or even developing public information and participation programs. In exchange, area residents receive a discount on their flood insurance premium rates. To conduct the study, the researchers examined 2.5 million flood insurance claims filed with FEMA since then. They also examined U.S. Census Bureau data to analyze demographic and economic data about communities, and incorporated flood risk data from the First Street Foundation. By comparing over 1,500 communities in the FEMA program, the researchers were able to quantify its different relative effects -- depending on community characteristics such as population, race, income or flood risk. For instance, higher-income communities seem better able to make more flood-control and mitigation investments, earning better FEMA ratings and, ultimately, enacting more effective measures. "You see some positive effects for low-income communities, but as the risks go up, these disappear, while only high-income communities continue seeing these positive effects," says Cano Pecharromán. "They are likely able to afford measures that handle a higher risk indices for flooding." Similarly, the researchers found, communities with higher overall levels of education fare better from the flood-insurance program, with about $2,000 more in savings per individual policy than communities with lower levels of education. One way or another, communities with more assets in the first place -- size, wealth, education -- are better able to deploy or hire the civic and technical expertise necessary to enact more best practices against flood damage. And even among lower-income communities in the program, communities with less population diversity see greater effectiveness from their flood program activities, realizing a gain of about $6,000 per household compared to communities where racial and ethnic minorities are predominant. "These are substantial effects, and we should consider these things when making decisions and reviewing if our climate adaptation policies work," Cano Pecharromán says. An even larger number of communities is not in the FEMA program at all. The study identified 14,729 unique U.S. communities with flood issues. Many of those are likely lacking the capacity to engage on flooding issues the way even the lower-ranked communities within the FEMA program have at least taken some action so far. "If we are able to consider all the communities that are not in the program because they can't afford to do the basics, we would likely see that the effects are even larger among different communities," Cano Pecharromán says. Getting communities started To make the program more effective for more people, Cano Pecharromán suggests that the federal government should consider how to help communities enact flood-control and mitigation measures in the first place. "When we set out these kinds of policies, we need to consider how certain types of communities might need help with implementation," she says. Methodologically, the researchers arrived at their conclusions using an advanced statistical approach that Hahn, who is an astrophysicist by training, has applied to the study of dark energy and galaxies. Instead of finding one "average treatment effect" of the FEMA program across all participating communities, they quantified the program's impact while subdividing the set of participating set of communities according to their characteristics. "We are able to calculate the causal effect of [the program], not as an average, which can hide these inequalities, but at every given level of the specific characteristic of communities we're looking at, different levels of income, different levels of education, and more," Cano Pecharromán says. Government officials have seen Cano Pecharromán present the preliminary findings at meetings, and expressed interest in the results. Currently, she is also working on a follow-up study, which aims to pinpoint which types of local flood-mitigation programs provide the biggest benefits for local communities. Support for the research was provided, in part, by the La Caixa Foundation, the MIT Martin Family Society of Fellows for Sustainability, and the AI Accelerator program of the Schmidt Futures Foundation.

The study, published in Nature , combines data from ancient shells of marine organisms with advanced climate modeling to shed light on how El Niño patterns might change in a warming world. El Niño is a climate phenomenon characterized by the irregular but periodic warming of sea surface temperatures in the central and eastern Pacific Ocean. This leads to disruption of global weather patterns and causes extreme events like droughts, floods and heat waves. "El Niño is a formidable force of nature -- it induces droughts, floods and wildfires, disrupting marine and terrestrial ecosystems across the planet, with pervasive societal impacts across numerous sectors, from agriculture to the aviation industry," said Kaustubh Thirumalai , the study's co-lead author and an assistant professor in the U of A Department of Geosciences. El Niño events occur approximately every two to seven years, and anticipating how these events might change in the future is a major challenge for climate scientists. "There are several state-of-the-art climate models out there, and they suggest different El Niño responses to ongoing and future human-caused warming," Thirumalai said. "Some say El Niño variations will increase, others say it will decrease -- it is a complex, multifaceted phenomenon. So, addressing what might happen to El Niño is a key priority for climate science." To address this uncertainty, the research team -- which included collaborators from the U of A, University of Colorado Boulder, University of Texas, Middlebury College and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution -- turned to the past. They focused on the Last Glacial Maximum -- a period about 20,000 years ago when there were ice sheets over much of North America and Europe. The researchers used the Community Earth System Model -- developed to simulate the Earth's climate system and predict future climate scenarios -- to simulate climate conditions from the Last Glacial Maximum to the present day. This model is a collaborative project primarily led by the National Center for Atmospheric Research, with contributions from numerous institutions. The modeling portion of the study was conducted by co-lead author Pedro DiNezo at the University of Colorado Boulder. To validate this model, Thirumalai and his team compared the model's results with data from the remains of tiny marine organisms called foraminifera. They are found in ocean samples extracted from the seabed that contain layers of sediments deposited over thousands to millions of years. "These beautiful, microscopic creatures, which float in the upper ocean, build shells that lock in the ocean temperature when they were alive," Thirumalai said. As foraminifera grow, they secrete shells using materials from the surrounding seawater. The chemical composition of these shells changes based on the water temperature. This enables the preservation of a snapshot of ocean conditions at the time the shell formed. When foraminifera die after a few weeks of life, their shells sink to the ocean floor and become part of the sediment. By analyzing shells from different layers of sediment, scientists can reconstruct ocean temperatures from thousands of years ago and compare them to the model simulations of past climates. The team analyzed individual foraminiferal shells, allowing them to capture seasonal temperature variations that would otherwise be impossible to detect. "We zoom in to a tiny section of the sediment core and analyze multiple individual shells from the same layer. This gives us a range of Pacific Ocean temperatures within a short time period, which we can compare between the ice age and today," Thirumalai said. The study found that El Niño variability was significantly lower during the Last Glacial Maximum compared to the present day, and that future extreme El Niño events could become more prevalent as the planet warms. This could lead to more intense and frequent weather disruptions worldwide. Importantly, these findings suggest a common mechanism of extreme El Niño variations under both ice age and future conditions, allowing the researchers to validate the climate model's prediction. "This gives us more confidence in the model's projections for the future," Thirumalai said. "If it can accurately simulate past climate changes, it's more likely to give us reliable predictions about future changes in the El Niño system."

In a new study published Sep. 25 in the journal Nature , a University of Colorado Boulder climate scientist and collaborators reveal that the planet could see more frequent extreme El Niño events by 2050 if greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase. "It's pretty scary that 2050 is not very far away," said Pedro DiNezio, the paper's co-lead author and associate professor in the Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences. "If these extreme events become more frequent, society may not have enough time to recover, rebuild and adapt before the next El Niño strikes. The consequences would be devastating." Shifting wind and soaring temperatures El Niño occurs when water temperatures along the equator in the Pacific Ocean rise by at least 0.9 °F above average for an extended period. The seemingly marginal temperature change can shift wind patterns and ocean currents, triggering unusual weather worldwide, including heat waves, floods and droughts. When the area warms by 3.6°F above average, scientists classify the El Niño event as extreme. Since the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration began collecting data in the 1950s, the agency has recorded up to four extreme El Niño events. During an extreme El Niño, the impacts on global weather tend to be more severe. For example, during the winter of 1997-98, El Niño brought record rainfall to California, causing devastating landslides that killed more than a dozen people. Over the same period, the planet lost about 15% of its coral reefs due to prolonged warming. Last winter El Niño almost reached extreme magnitude, DiNezio said. "El Niño events are difficult to simulate and predict because there are many mechanisms driving them. This has hindered our ability to produce accurate predictions and help society prepare and reduce the potential damage," they said. Prior research suggests that climate change is intensifying and increasing the frequency of extreme weather events, possibly linked to changes in El Niño patterns. However, due to limited data, scientists have yet to confirm whether El Niño will strengthen with warming. DiNezio and their team set out to simulate El Niño events in the past 21,000 years -- since the peak of Earth's last Ice Age -- using a computer model. The model shows that during the Ice Age, when Earth's climate was colder, extreme El Niño events were very rare. As the planet warmed since the end of the Ice Age, the frequency and intensity of El Niño have been increasing. The team validated the model by comparing the simulated data with past ocean temperature data retrieved from fossilized shells of foraminifera, a group of single-celled organisms ubiquitous in the oceans long before human existence. By analyzing the type of oxygen compounds preserved in these fossilized shells, the team reconstructed how El Niño drove ocean temperature fluctuations across the Pacific Ocean for the past 21,000 years. The ancient record aligned with the model's simulations. "We are the first to show a model that can realistically simulate past El Niño events, enhancing our confidence in its future predictions. We are also proud of the robust technique we developed to evaluate our model, but unfortunately, it brought us no good news," DiNezio added. The model predicts that if society continues to pump greenhouse gases into the atmosphere at the current rate, one in two El Niño events could be extreme by 2050. The control knob Despite El Niño's complexity, the model reveals that a single mechanism has controlled the frequency and intensity of all El Niño events as the planet has warmed since the last Ice Age. When the eastern Pacific Ocean water warms from natural fluctuation, the winds that always blow east to west over the equatorial Pacific weaken due to changes in air pressure above the ocean. But during an El Niño, weakened winds allow warm water to flow east, and the warmer water weakens the winds even more, creating a feedback loop known as the Bjerknes feedback. DiNezio's research suggests that as the atmosphere warms rapidly from greenhouse gas emissions, the planet experiences a stronger Bjerknes feedback, leading to more frequent extreme El Niño events. With the most recent El Niño now in the past, DiNezio emphasized that society needs to focus on taking measures to reduce the impact from future extreme El Niño events, including cutting emissions and helping communities, particularly those in the developing countries, become resilient to extreme weather. "We now understand how these extreme events happen, and we just need the will to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels," they said. "Our findings emphasize the urgent need to limit warming to 1.5 °C to avoid catastrophic climate impacts."

"From 2010 to 2019, we saw regular increases -- with slight accelerations -- in atmospheric methane concentrations, but the increases that occurred from 2020 to 2022 and overlapped with the COVID-19 shutdown were significantly higher," says Zhen Qu, assistant professor of marine, earth and atmospheric sciences at North Carolina State University and lead author of the research. "Global methane emissions increased from about 499 teragrams (Tg) to 550 Tg during the period from 2010 to 2019, followed by a surge to 570 -- 590 Tg between 2020 and 2022." Atmospheric methane emissions are given by their mass in teragrams. One teragram equals about 1.1 million U.S. tons. One of the leading theories concerning the sudden atmospheric methane surge was the decrease in human-made air pollution from automobiles and industry during the pandemic shutdown of 2020 and 2021. Air pollution contributes hydroxyl radicals (OH) to the lower atmosphere. In turn, atmospheric OH interacts with other gases, such as methane, to break them down. "The prevailing idea was that the pandemic reduced the amount of OH concentration, therefore there was less OH available in the atmosphere to react with and remove methane," Qu says. To test the theory, Qu and a team of researchers from the U.S., U.K. and Germany looked at global satellite emissions data and atmospheric simulations for both methane and OH during the period from 2010 to 2019 and compared it to the same data from 2020 to 2022 to tease out the source of the surge. Using data from satellite readings of atmospheric composition and chemical transport models, the researchers created a model that allowed them to determine both amounts and sources of methane and OH for both time periods. They found that most of the 2020 to 2022 methane surge was a result of inundation events -- or flooding events -- in equatorial Asia and Africa, which accounted for 43% and 30% of the additional atmospheric methane, respectively. While OH levels did decrease during the period, this decrease only accounted for 28% of the surge. "The heavy precipitation in these wetland and rice cultivation regions is likely associated with the La Niña conditions from 2020 to early 2023," Qu says. "Microbes in wetlands produce methane as they metabolize and break down organic matter anaerobically, or without oxygen. More water storage in wetlands means more anaerobic microbial activity and more release of methane to the atmosphere." The researchers feel that a better understanding of wetland emissions is important to developing plans for mitigation. "Our findings point to the wet tropics as the driving force behind increased methane concentrations since 2010," Qu says. "Improved observations of wetland methane emissions and how methane production responds to precipitation changes are key to understanding the role of precipitation patterns on tropical wetland ecosystems." The research appears in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences and was supported in part by NASA Early Career Investigator Program under grant 80NSSC24K1049. Qu is the corresponding author and began the research while a postdoctoral researcher at Harvard University. Daniel Jacob of Harvard; Anthony Bloom and John Worden of the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory; Robert Parker of the University of Leicester, U.K.; and Hartmut Boesch of the University of Bremen, Germany, also contributed to the work.

The team collected a more than 2-meter-long core from this colony, which is growing only 3 to 6 millimeters per year, and analyzed its skeletal chemical composition to draw conclusions on the temperature variations over the course of 627 years. This was supplemented by the results of 26 years of instrumental measurements of water temperatures. The southwestern Pacific region is a major driver of climate variability, modulating for example the El Niño-Southern Oscillation, one of the main phenomena influencing global climate, thus affecting human activities and natural ecosystems worldwide. Corals -- living temperature sensors The research team, co-led by Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México and the University of Leicester in the UK, has thus produced what is to date the longest continuous coral Strontium/Calcium-sea surface temperature reconstruction, offering a distinct and unprecedented perspective on long-term Pacific climate swings from a key location to characterize ocean temperature gradients. Researchers from Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz (JGU) contributed to the study by supporting the annually resolved chronology of the coral record. "We used the uranium-thorium dating method to determine the age of each deposited layer. Thus, we were able to independently check and finally confirm the identification of the counting of individual annual layers. This enabled the precise and absolute dating of the coral," said Professor Denis Scholz, head of the Isotope-geochemical Palaeoclimatology / Speleothem Research group at the JGU Institute of Geosciences. As they can live for centuries and even thousands of years, corals serve researchers as living temperature sensors -- by recording the chemical composition of the ocean around them in their skeletons, day-in and day-out. The corals act like a living temperature sensor by changing the ratio of skeletal Strontium over Calcium with lower ratios being related to higher temperatures. The study shows that the current sea surface temperature in the Fijian archipelago is highest for the past 653 years, and persistent synchronous western and central Pacific warming rates could adversely impact Pacific Island ecosystems and nations. The work also sheds new light on the interplay between ocean temperature trends across the tropical and subtropical Pacific Oceans over six centuries, revealing how late 20th century warming has become increasingly synchronized between these regions that normally oppose each other, creating important temperature gradients that are the heart of major shifts in rainfall centers across the past few centuries. Taking into account current climate model simulations, researchers expect additional drought and heavy rainfall events in certain areas of the Pacific over the further course of the 21st century. If no counteractions are taken, there will be detrimental impacts for the inhabitants of endangered Pacific islands and their ecosystems. International collaboration spanning three continents The study was a collaboration of Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California, the University of Leicester, the University of New South Wales, Monash University, Université de Bordeaux, the Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon, and Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz.

The study, published in the Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans , studied the effects of dams built in coastal estuaries, where rivers and ocean tides interact. Those massive infrastructure projects are surging in popularity globally, in part to help offset intensifying storms, salt intrusion and sea-level rise fueled by climate change. By analyzing data and measurements from Charleston Harbor, South Carolina, dating back more than a century, researchers determined that coastal dams don't necessarily mitigate flooding. Dams can either increase or decrease flood risks, depending on the duration of a surge event and friction from the flow of water. "We usually think about storm surges becoming smaller as you go inland, but the shape of the basin can actually cause it to become larger," said lead author Steven Dykstra, an assistant professor at the University of Alaska Fairbanks College of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences. Estuaries are typically shaped like a funnel, narrowing as they go inland. Introducing a dam shortens the estuary with an artificial wall that reflects storm surge waves moving inland. The narrowing channel shape also makes small reflections that change with the surge duration. Dykstra compared those storm-fueled waves to splashes in a bathtub, with certain wave frequencies causing water to slosh over the sides. After using Charleston Harbor as a case study, researchers used computer modeling to gauge the flood response at 23 other estuaries in diverse geographic areas. Those encompassed both dammed and naturally occurring estuary systems, including Cook Inlet in Alaska. The models confirmed that the basin shape and alterations that shorten it with a dam are the key component in determining how storm surges and tides move inland. At the right amplitude and duration, waves in dammed environments grow instead of diminishing. The study also determined that areas far from coastal dams could still be directly influenced by human-created infrastructure. In the Charleston area, the highest storm surges routinely occurred more than 50 miles inland. "One of the scary things with this is that sometimes people don't realize they are in a coastal-influenced zone," Dykstra said. "Sea-level rise is making people far inland aware that they're not free from coastal effects -- and it usually happens with a massive flood." Other contributors to the study included Enrica Viparelli, Alexander Yankovsky and Raymond Torres from the University of South Carolina, and Stefan Talke from California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.

Hallock has spent her career studying the ocean. She leads USF's Reef Indicators Lab and is no stranger to the impacts of human activities on marine environments. Still, she couldn't help but notice a bright spot in the results of her recent paper on a species of single-celled organisms called foraminifera (forams), published in the Journal of Foraminiferal Research . "These forams have been increasing in numbers in suitable environments," Hallock said. "Now they're so prolific that they're becoming an economic resource in regions with warm waters and high alkalinity because they're building beaches." The foram species in question, Amphistegina lobifera , found favorable conditions in the warm, nutrient-poor waters of the Mediterranean Sea after traveling north through the Suez Canal 60-80 years ago. A. lobifera populations have since proliferated in the eastern Mediterranean and spread westward, raising concerns about its invasive potential in the region. Despite these concerns, A. lobifera may be boon for tourism in countries like Turkey, Hallock said. Their calcium carbonate skeletons make excellent beach sand. Shorelines once covered in jagged volcanic and limestone rock have accumulated a half meter or more of sand comprised of dead foram skeletons and other shells. "The rate at which these forams are building beaches in the region is comparable to the rate of sea level rise," Hallock said. There's reason to believe A. lobifera may continue to flourish in a warming world replete with atmospheric CO 2 . The genus Amphistegina emerged on Earth during a period of higher atmospheric CO 2 concentrations, Hallock noted in her paper, and warm waters with elevated alkalinity increase their rates of metabolism and shell formation. While A. lobifera may currently be considered invasive in the Mediterranean Sea, its presence in the region is really a return to ancestral waters. "These are a kind of critter that previously inhabited the region," she said. "Now, through our influence on the environment, we're making the habitat once again suitable for them." The recent study offers a unique perspective about the impacts of humans on marine environments, and vice versa. As Hallock and her co-authors state in the study, "Might this return of prolific shallow-water carbonate production ultimately prove at least locally beneficial as climate change progresses?"

In a new study published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , researchers at The University of Texas at Austin looked for evidence of precipitation anomalies in 1,056 cities across the globe and found that more than 60% of those cities receive more precipitation than their surrounding rural areas. In some cases, the difference can be significant. For instance, researchers found that Houston, on average, will receive almost 5 inches more rain per year than its surrounding rural areas. This could have wide-ranging implications, the most serious of which is worsened flash flooding in densely built urban areas. Variation in urban rainfall is something scientists have known about for several decades, but never at a global scale. Previous studies only looked at certain cities and storm cases, said study author Xinxin Sui, a doctoral student at the Cockrell School of Engineering. For this paper, she and other researchers poured over precipitation datasets from satellites and radar systems, examining daily precipitation anomalies for these 1,056 cities from 2001 to 2020. "In general, we found that over 60% of these global cities have more rainfall (than the surrounding countryside). Then we compared with different climate zones and found that if the local climate is hotter, if it's wetter, then it may have a larger rainfall anomaly compared to the cities in cooler and dryer places," Sui said. In addition to Houston, the list of large cities with the largest precipitation anomalies include Ho Chi Minh, Vietnam; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Lagos, Nigeria; and the Miami-Fort Lauderdale-West Palm Beach metropolitan area. Study author Dev Niyogi, a professor at both the Jackson School of Geosciences and Cockrell School of Engineering, explained that urban areas tend to take rain from one location and concentrate it in another, much like a sponge that is being squeezed. "If you were to pinch one part of the sponge, you would have water coming down more forcefully from one side," he said. "The amount of water you have in the sponge is the same, but because now you have that dynamic sort of squeezing the atmosphere, you have more ability to take the water out from that location." Although it's less common, some urban areas actually receive less rainfall than their surrounding rural counterparts. This typically occurs in cities situated in valleys and lowlands, where precipitation patterns are controlled by nearby mountains. The cities where this is most pronounced include Seattle, Washington; Kyoto, Japan; and Jakarta, Indonesia. There are several reasons why most cities receive more rainfall than their rural neighbors. Co-author Liang Yang, professor at the Jackson School, said one key factor is the presence of tall buildings, which block or slow down wind speeds. This leads to a convergence of air toward the city center. "The buildings further enhance this convergence by slowing the winds, resulting in a stronger upward motion of air. This upward motion promotes the condensation of water vapor and cloud formation, which are critical conditions for producing rainfall and precipitation," Yang said. Researchers found that population has the largest correlation with urban precipitation anomalies compared to other environmental and urbanization factors. This is because larger populations typically create denser and taller urban areas, along with more greenhouse gas emissions, and therefore more pronounced heat, Niyogi said. This phenomenon has implications for all cities heading into a future of climate change, said Yang, who described how the increased chances of rainfall in cities combined with the impervious surfaces that make up their urban environments can be a recipe for flash flooding. "Combining these two factors means we must develop innovative ways to prepare for flash flooding," Yang said.

The new study finds that more storms form over urban areas and their boundaries than in surrounding areas, and that larger cities intensify rainfall more than smaller cities. The research was published in Earth's Future , an open-access AGU journal that publishes interdisciplinary research on the past, present and future of our planet and its inhabitants. "Cities are expected to become more populated and increase in size in the coming decades," said Herminia Torelló-Sentelles, an atmospheric scientist at the University of Lausanne and the study's lead author. "Being able to quantify urban flood risk is important for urban planning and when designing urban drainage systems." The rain effect has been reported in studies of single cities, but the new research looked for trends and differences across multiple cities. Differences in urban rainfall patterns highlight the need to keep studying storm activity in cities across the globe, Torelló-Sentelles said. Taking cities by storm Some storms have rain that falls evenly, like a sprinkler, while others drop rain in concentrated bursts, like a fire hose. The new study finds that cities can turn storms into fire hoses, dropping bursts of rainfall over small urban areas instead of spreading out the rain over a larger area. Those concentrated bursts of rainfall can exacerbate flood risks if city infrastructure cannot handle the deluge. Most cities are producing more fire hose-like storms than rural areas. Cities are also spawning more storms than their surroundings, and bigger cities are generating stronger storms than smaller cities. "It's not only intensity of rainfall that matters when you look at flood risk. It's also how it's distributed over space," Torelló-Sentelles said. "If you have a very large amount of rainfall falling over a very small area, that can collapse the drainage system in an urban area." Several factors could be causing urban storm creation and intensification, Torelló-Sentelles said. Cities are generally warmer than their cool, moist and vegetation-dense surroundings, which could cause air to be drawn toward the cities and uplifted. That warm, uplifted air then condenses into rainclouds over urban centers. Storms are also often formed as air is uplifted over mountain ranges, producing rain clouds at the mountains' peaks. Like mini mountain ranges, city skylines can create favorable environments for the uplift of airmasses and the creation of storms. "You can think of a city like an obstacle," Torelló-Sentelles said. "When a storm is moving toward it, the air can be lifted over and around it." Aerosol pollution suspended in the atmosphere over cities may also either enhance or suppress rainfall. The researchers used seven years of high-resolution weather data from eight cities in Europe and the United States (Milan, Italy; Berlin, Germany; London and Birmingham, United Kingdom; Phoenix, Arizona; Charlotte, North Carolina; Atlanta, Georgia; and Indianapolis, Indiana) to track summer storm formation and intensity in cities and their surroundings. The cities varied in size, climate and urban shape, but all are in relatively flat regions and far from large bodies of water -- factors which could influence local rainfall patterns. The researchers tracked storm formation and evolution outside of and over cities and their boundaries, identifying the average direction, average intensity, maximum intensity and area of each storm. They found that more storms overall formed over cities and their boundaries compared to nearby rural areas. Storms typically were most intense over city centers, or over the city edges as in Berlin and Birmingham. Larger cities had greater rainfall intensification than smaller cities: in smaller cities, rainfall intensified by 0.9% to 3.4%, while it increased from 5.2% to 11% in the largest cities compared to outlying areas. Some cities also had much higher rainfall intensification during specific times of the day. Rainfall also became more spatially concentrated over urban areas by up to 15%. Concentrated bursts of rainfall can tax urban water management systems more than rainfall that is evenly distributed. Strong storms increase urban flood risk Increasingly large urban areas could generate and amplify more storms than their surroundings, even as climate change continues to intensify storms worldwide. The combined impact of urban growth and climate change could stress urban stormwater systems and lead to more frequent and severe floods. While the researchers found some consistent trends across all cities, every city changed rainfall patterns in unique ways. For instance, while most of the cities had storms with stronger bursts of rainfall than their surroundings, Berlin and Charlotte had more dispersed rainfall. In Atlanta, storms intensified the most in the daytime hours, while storms in Birmingham only intensified overnight. And unlike the other six cities studied, Berlin and Phoenix did not have more storms initiate over the city than in surrounding areas. These results highlight the need for individual city planning strategies and studies including more cities, Torelló-Sentelles said. As the climate changes and the world urbanizes, individual cities will need to develop their own adaptation and mitigation strategies. "We need to study a wider variety of cities so that we can generalize findings and determine which city characteristics have the largest effects on cities' rainfall-modifying potential," she said. "The mechanisms driving urban rainfall are quite complex, and we still need to research these processes more."

Existing tools -- traffic cameras, water-level sensors and even social media data -- can provide observations of flooding, but they are often not primarily designed for sensing flood conditions on roads and do not work in conjunction. A network of sensors could improve situational flood level awareness; however, they are expensive to operate at scale. Engineers at Rice University have developed a possible solution to this problem: an automated data fusion framework called OpenSafe Fusion. Short for Open Source Situational Awareness Framework for Mobility using Data Fusion, OpenSafe Fusion leverages existing individual reporting mechanisms and public data sources to sense quickly evolving road conditions during urban flooding events, which are becoming increasingly frequent. Jamie Padgett, Rice's Stanley C. Moore Professor in Engineering and chair of the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, together with Pranavesh Panakkal, a postdoctoral researcher in civil and environmental engineering, analyzed data from nine sources in Houston before developing the comprehensive framework for the automated data system in their research study titled "More eyes on the road: Sensing flooded roads by fusing real-time observations from public data sources," published in the journal Reliability Engineering & System Safety. "While sources directly observing flooded roads are limited, urban centers are replete with sources directly or indirectly observing flooding or road conditions," Padgett said. Padgett and Panakkal hypothesized that an automated system combining insights from these real-time sources could potentially revolutionize flood situational awareness without significant investment in new sensors. "This study offers communities a pathway to equitably sense and respond to urban stressors such as flooding using existing data sources," Padgett said. "It builds off of and is inspired by our longtime collaboration with colleagues in the SSPEED Center at Rice, who have been developing state-of-the-art flood alert systems. Here we focus on flood impacts on transportation infrastructure and focus on understanding how other data sources can complement information from flood models, especially with respect to impact on roadways and safe mobility." The framework uses data from sources like traffic alerts, cameras and even traffic speed, and leverages machine learning and data fusion to predict whether a road is flooded or not. The value of such data sources was evident during Hurricane Harvey in 2017 as many people in Houston -- including emergency responders -- resorted to manually examining data sources to infer probable road conditions to overcome the lack of reliable real-time road condition data. To test the OpenSafe Fusion process, the researchers used historical flooding data observed during Harvey to recreate the scenario in the framework, consisting of around 62,000 roads in the Houston region. "The model was able to observe around 37,000 road links, which is around 60% of the network that we considered, and that is a significant improvement," Panakkal said. Other data sources that could be used in the framework include: water-level sensors, citizen portals, crowdsourcing, social media, flood models and a factor the study refers to as "human-in-the-loop." This last source is especially important, Panakkal says, as the human element of OpenSafe Fusion allows for responsible artificial intelligence (AI) usage. "We do not want a system that is fully automated and without any human control," Panakkal said. "The model may make a wrong prediction, which could endanger community members who decide to risk travel based on this prediction. So we designed safeguards based on responsible AI usage. This need for responsible AI in such tools is still an open area for further work, and we hope to dig deeper as we test our methods in the future." The study also considered flooding impacts on community access to critical facilities such as hospitals and dialysis centers during a natural disaster. "This gives community members or emergency responders an understanding of which roads are flooded and how to safely navigate to a location," Panakkal said. Padgett says the researchers hope to pursue extensive testing, validation and exploration of how communities with different scales and resource availability could use this framework to better sense road conditions during a flood. "Considering climate change impacts and climate-exacerbated weather events, the frequency and intensity of flood events could increase in the future, so we need a solution to better respond to flood events and their impacts on infrastructure," Padgett said.

Based on studies of 199 cities across 54 countries, the researchers investigated whether and how cities take certain risk factors into account in their adaptation efforts. Climate factors like rising sea levels, storms, flooding and heat were among the key parameters considered. Other aspects were also taken into account in the analysis, such as the exposure and vulnerability of the population, the infrastructure and the ecosystems in the respective region. Climate measures are mostly inadequate Most of the measures taken to adapt to climate change relate primarily to sea level rise, flooding and, to a lesser extent, storm surges, cyclones and erosion. Technical and institutional measures such as large-scale levees or urban planning innovations are more common in wealthier regions like North America and Europe. In less prosperous regions such as in many parts of Africa and Asia, behavior-related measures are the dominant type, with affected households and companies being largely left to their own devices. Overall, the LMU researchers found that most adaptation measures are inadequate in their depth, scope and speed -- regardless of the region or its prosperity. The researchers also found little evidence of a sustainable reduction in risk as a result of the measures taken. "Our findings reveal that there is plenty of work still to be done on all levels," explains Prof. Matthias Garschagen. "There has been little truly far-reaching change involving a fundamental rethink of risk management. Cities often attempt to optimize their disaster management on the basis of past experience without fundamentally questioning whether these approaches are still going to be viable in the future," says Garschagen. Global research on climate change needs to be done in all regions of the world The research also found that it is rare for adaptation planning to be based on quantifiable factors. Although cities do take future natural risks such as flooding and heat into account, they rarely consider socioeconomic factors such as future trends in societal vulnerability or spatial growth and exposure. "But those trends those are important," says Garschagen, "because the Lagos or Jakarta of today is not the same as it's going to be in 20 years' time. There are certainly big research aps and we need better scenarios and better modeling methods. Another important question is about when it makes more sense to abandon coastal protection measures and consider resettling the population instead." Matthias Garschagen is therefore calling for a major increase in research activity in the Global South. Most of the research activity to date has been concentrated on cities in the Global North. "Global climate change research that covers all regions of the world would enable us to fight the climate crisis faster and more effectively," says Matthias Garschagen.

The study, published today and led by experts from the University of Bristol and global water risk intelligence firm Fathom, reveals projections of different types of flooding in various climate change scenarios with unprecedented precision. Through deploying the most comprehensive mapping framework, findings indicate overall global flooding could increase by around half between 2020 and the turn of the century in the event of high climate sensitivity and multilateral promises to reduce carbon emissions being broken. Lead author Dr Oliver Wing, Honorary Research Fellow at the University of Bristol Cabot Institute for the Environment and Chief Research Officer at Fathom, said: "This research represents the culmination of years of research on our quest to help future-proof communities around the world from the evolving risk of flooding. The findings underscore the vital importance of all countries keeping their promise to cut carbon emissions." In the best-case lower emissions scenario, where all global carbon pledges are fulfilled, the average flood hazard level is projected to rise by 9% between 2020 and 2100. The more pessimistic prospect of higher carbon emissions showed flooding could increase 49% by the end of the century. In the next few decades, the projected increases in flood hazard were more modest. Between 2020 and 2050, in a low carbon emissions scenario flood risk is anticipated to grow 7% with this doubling to more than 15% in a high carbon emissions model. Dr Wing said: "It is important to note that these global averages result from predicted changes in hazard that have large geographical variations. Some places will see their flood risk fall, whilst for others the increases will be many times larger than the global average even under a lower emissions scenario." The report highlighted that coastal flooding remains a hotspot regardless of whether all global carbon emissions are met or not. Even in a low emissions scenario, coastal flooding is forecast to almost double, increasing by 99% by 2100, due to the lagged response of ocean sea level rise to existing warming. Flooding caused by rainfall was found to be especially vulnerable to human-induced climate change. Whereas this type of flooding was shown to increase by 6% by 2100 in a low emissions scenario, this increase grows to 44% in a high emissions model. The largest future increases in flooding are projected to be around global coastlines and in tropical Africa and Asia, as well as significant changes to arid North Africa. The likelihood of flood increases was most pronounced along the North Atlantic and Indian Ocean coasts, as well as for southeastern Asia and the Pacific Islands. Recently developed global flood models estimate the national or global population exposed to floods; potential value of assets at risk; cost and benefits of flood defences, and the impact of climate and socio-economic change on future losses. Most only represent river flooding, but this study factors in the significant impact of coastal flooding, and has undergone the most rigorous validation of any global flood model to date. Countries signed up to ambitious pledges to lower carbon emissions at COP27 and the study clearly indicates that if these aren't all achieved on time and in full, flooding levels look set to be heavily impacted. Co-author Professor Paul Bates CBE, Professor of Hydrology at the University of Bristol Cabot Institute for the Environment and Chairman and Co-founder of Fathom, said: "Undertaking this research project involved subjecting our findings to the most comprehensive benchmarking of global flood modelling yet published. "With the highest resolution results produced to date, we hope industries will derive value from our model for a range of additional use cases, such as protecting critical infrastructure from future flooding, helping insurers price premiums and meeting the requirements of climate regulations." Additional contributors to the research paper from the University of Bristol include Prof Jeff Neal, Professor of Hydrology at the University of Bristol Cabot Institute for the Environment and Chief Scientific Advisor at Fathom; and two Fathom scientists soon to embark on PhDs at the University.

Scientists previously thought warming temperatures caused by climate change and increased nutrient levels due to pollution might offset each other's impact on aquatic life. However, a new study has shown warming waters and nutrient overload is a dangerous combination threatening our rivers and lakes. The research, conducted by an international team of scientists from the University of Sheffield, University of Oxford and University of Savoie Mont Blanc and the French National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and the Environment, examined hundreds of lakes and streams, analysing the complex relationships between fish species. Researchers found that food webs, the intricate networks of who eats who, are becoming less complex in warmer, nutrient-rich waters. This simplification means shorter food chains, and an ecosystem with a degraded functioning. Top predators are particularly vulnerable to these changes, but they are essential to the functioning and the stability of ecosystems. Less than three per cent of the water on our planet is fresh, yet freshwater habitats are home to almost 10 per cent of all known animals and almost half of all known fish species. Freshwater ecosystems not only help to maintain water quality of the land and sea, but also allow wildlife such as eels and salmon to travel vast distances to complete their life cycles, and act as conveyor belts transporting nutrients that make soil good for growing food. The far reaching impact of the need to reduce pollution levels in our rivers was felt globally when the Olympic open water swimming events such as the triathlon, due to take place in the Seine river in Paris, had to be postponed due to harmful bacterial levels. The study highlights that this need is even more urgent with the rising impacts of warming of climate change, but it also suggests that reducing pollution levels is a promising path to mitigate the impacts of climate change. Alain Danet, Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Sheffield and co-first author of the study, said: "The eyes of the world have been on the Seine River this summer due to the Olympic Games. The challenges faced in Paris demonstrate how important it is to reduce the pollution levels in our rivers and lakes not only for our own health but for the health of our ecosystems. "Our rivers, lakes, wetlands and underground water supplies store and clean the water that's crucial for people and wildlife. From providing drinking water to providing essential resources to terrestrial and marine ecosystems, healthy freshwater systems are essential. "These vital ecosystems also protect us from flooding, filter pollution and support countless plants and animals." Willem Bonnaffé, Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Oxford and co-first author of the study, said: "Lake and river creatures are like the kidneys of our planet. They clean water and prevent blooms of poisonous algae and bacteria. Keeping them safe is keeping us safe. "Climate change and pollution are not isolated problems for our rivers and lakes, as scientists previously believed. Our study has found they interact in complex ways that threaten the balance of life in our waters. "By reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improving water quality, we can help safeguard the health of our rivers and lakes for future generations." Camille Leclerc, Postdoctoral Research Associate at the French National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and the Environment and co-first author of the study, said: "This important researchhas shown what a dangerous combination warming waters caused by climate change and increased nutrient levels caused by pollution are. "More positively this study shows that if we can reduce the pollution in our lakes and rivers, it will better protect them against the effects of climate change and warmer waters."

"In the Northern Hemisphere, much of the ground is permafrost, meaning it is frozen year-round. Permafrost is a delicate natural resource. If it is lost faster than it is regenerated, we endanger infrastructure and release carbon, which can warm the atmosphere," said Nathan D. Brown, assistant professor of earth and environmental sciences at UT Arlington. "Under a warming climate, a major question is whether arctic rivers will erode permafrost in thawing riverbanks faster than permafrost can regenerate." It happens slowly, but all rivers naturally change their paths over time. Floods, earthquakes, vegetation growth, and wildlife are constantly at work shifting rivers, charting new paths for water, and depositing sediment where water once flowed. A difference seen with Alaskan rivers is that the land on riverbanks can be permanently frozen. Called permafrost, it's a mixture of soil, gravel and sand often bound together by ice. Permafrost is important because it holds large amounts of organic carbon, which is then released when it melts. This carbon can combine with oxygen to become carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas that warms Earth's atmosphere. To better understand the fate of permafrost in a warming world, Dr. Brown -- along with colleagues from the California Institute of Technology; Massachusetts Institute of Technology; University of California at Santa Barbara; Los Alamos National Laboratory; the University of Chicago; and the University of Pennsylvania -- mapped and dated floodplain deposits, determined permafrost extent, and characterized vegetation along the Koyukuk River in Alaska to model how permafrost formation varies with air temperature. The Koyukuk is a 425-mile feeder stream of the Yukon River and the last major tributary to flow into the Yukon before it empties into the Bering Sea, the major waterway separating America and Russia. In the American Geophysical Union journal AGU Advances , the team reported that while new permafrost is developing along the Koyukuk River floodplain, it is not forming fast enough to replace what is disappearing due to rising temperatures. "By dating these permafrost deposits, we found that permafrost formation in this region can take thousands of years," said Brown. "Under a warming climate, permafrost formation is expected to take longer, while thawing permafrost riverbanks will become more susceptible to erosion. The net result will be loss of permafrost and contribution of carbon to the atmosphere."

A new studyprovides the first direct evidence that the center -- not just the edges -- of Greenland's ice sheet melted away in the recent geological past and the now-ice-covered island was then home to a green, tundra landscape. A team of scientists re-examined a few inches of sediment from the bottom of a two-mile-deep ice core extracted at the very center of Greenland in 1993 -- and held for 30 years in a Colorado storage facility. They were amazed to discover soil that contained willow wood, insect parts, fungi, and a poppy seed in pristine condition. "These fossils are beautiful," says Paul Bierman, a scientist at the University of Vermont who co-led the new study with UVM graduate student Halley Mastro and nine other researchers, "but, yes, we go from bad to worse," in what this implies about the impact of human-caused climate change on the melting of the Greenland ice sheet. The study, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences on August 5th, confirms that Greenland's ice melted and the island greened during a prior warm period likely within the last million years -- suggesting that the giant ice sheet is more fragile than scientists had realized until the last few years. If the ice covering the center of the island was melted, then most of the rest of it had to be melted too. "And probably for many thousands of years," Bierman said, enough time for soil to form and an ecosystem to take root. "This new study confirms and extends that a lot of sea-level rise occurred at a time when causes of warming were not especially extreme," said Richard Alley, a leading climate scientist at Penn State who reviewed the new research, "providing a warning of what damages we might cause if we continue to warm the climate." Sea level today is rising more than an inch each decade. "And it's getting faster and faster," said Bierman. It is likely to be several feet higher by the end of this century, when today's children are grandparents. And if the release of greenhouse gases -- from burning fossil fuels -- is not radically reduced, he said, the near complete melting of Greenland's ice over the next centuries to a few millennia would lead to some 23 feet of sea level rise. "Look at Boston, New York, Miami, Mumbai or pick your coastal city around the world, and add twenty plus feet of sea level," said Bierman. "It goes underwater. Don't buy a beach house." Core Assumptions In 2016, Joerg Schaefer at Columbia University and colleagues tested rock from the bottom of the same 1993 ice core (called GISP2) and published a then-controversial study suggesting that the current Greenland ice sheet could be no more than 1.1 million years old; that there were extended ice-free periods during the Pleistocene (the geological period that began 2.7 million years ago); and that if the ice was melted at the GISP2 site then 90% of the rest of Greenland would be melted also. This was a major step toward overturning the longstanding story that Greenland is an implacable fortress of ice, frozen solid for millions of years. Then, in 2019, UVM's Paul Bierman and an international team reexamined another ice core, this one extracted at Camp Century near the coast of Greenland in the 1960s. They were stunned to discover twigs, seeds, and insect parts at the bottom of that core -- revealing that the ice there had melted within the last 416,000 years. In other words, the walls of the ice fortress had failed much more recently than had been previously imagined possible. "Once we made the discovery at Camp Century, we thought, 'Hey, what's at the bottom of GISP2?'" said Bierman, a professor in UVM's Rubenstein School of Environment and Natural Resources and fellow in the Gund Institute for Environment. Though the ice and rock in that core had been studied extensively, "no one's looked at the 3 inches of till to see if it's soil and if it contains plant or insect remains," he said. So he and his colleagues requested a sample from the bottom of the GISP2 core held at the National Science Foundation Ice Core Facility in Lakewood, Colorado. Now this new study in PNAS, with support from the U.S. National Science Foundation, provides confirmation that the 2016 "fragile Greenland" hypothesis is right. And it deepens the reasons for concern, showing that the island was warm enough, for long enough, that an entire tundra ecosystem, perhaps with stunted trees, established itself where today ice is two miles deep. "We now have direct evidence that not only was the ice gone, but that plants and insects were living there," said Bierman. "And that's unassailable. You don't have to rely on calculations or models." From Flowers The initial discovery that there was intact biological material -- not just gravel and rock -- in the bottom of the ice core was made by geoscientist Andrew Christ who completed his PhD working at UVM and was a post-doctoral associate in Bierman's lab. Then Halley Mastro picked up the case and began to study the material closely. "It was amazing," she said. Under the microscope, what had looked like no more than specks floating on the surface of the melted core sample, was, in fact, a window into a tundra landscape. Working with Dorothy Peteet, an expert on macrofossils at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and co-author on the new study, Mastro was able to identify spores from spikemoss, the bud scale of a young willow, the compound eye of an insect, "and then we found Arctic poppy, just one seed of that," she said. "That is a tiny flower that's really good at adapting to the cold." But not that good. "It lets us know that Greenland's ice melted and there was soil," said Mastro, "because poppies don't grow on top of miles of ice."

These changes, driven by climate change, heighten risks for tens of millions in coastal areas, with cities like Hai Phong, Yangon, and Bangkok facing unprecedented threats from longer lasting and more intense storms. A tropical cyclone is a powerful, rotating storm that forms over warm ocean waters and brings strong winds and heavy rain. Tropical cyclones typically form in the tropical zone near the equator, characterised by warm ocean waters and consistent temperatures, providing the necessary heat and moisture for these cyclones to develop and intensify. Based on the analysis of more than 64,000 modelled historic and future storms from the 19 th century through the end of the 21 st century, the study, published in the peer-reviewed Nature partner journal Climate and Atmospheric Science , highlights significant changes in tropical cyclone behaviours in Southeast Asia, such as increased formation near coastlines and slower movement over land, which could pose new risks to the region. The study found that climate change alters tropical cyclones' paths in Southeast Asia. This research is the first to use data from various climate models to examine cyclones over the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries. The group of researchers explains that around the world, tropical cyclones are affected by warming ocean waters, and the warmer they get, the more energy storms can draw from them. Lead author Assistant Professor Andra Garner, at Rowan University's School of Earth & Environment, said: "Southeast Asia has very densely populated coastlines, currently home to more than 70 per cent of the global population that's exposed to future sea level rise. When you're looking at that densely populated coastline, and it's a region affected by tropical cyclones, there's a real risk, especially when those storms become more damaging, and populations continue to grow." Co-author of the study Professor Benjamin Horton, Director of NTU's Earth Observatory of Singapore,said: "Tropical cyclones have caused torrential rains and severe flooding across Southeast Asia, prompting mass evacuations, destroying infrastructure, and affecting the lives and livelihoods of thousands of people. Our study shows that as the cyclones travel across warmer oceans from climate change, they pull in more water vapour and heat. That means stronger wind, heavier rainfall, and more flooding when the typhoons hit land." Prof Horton is also a Professor in Earth Science at NTU's Asian School of the Environment. The study is part of NTU's S$50 million interdisciplinary climate research programme, the Climate Transformation Programme (CTP). Hosted by its Earth Observatory of Singapore and funded by Singapore's Ministry of Education, the CTP aims to investigate climate change, develop, inspire, and accelerate knowledge-based solutions, and educate future leaders to establish the stable climate and environment necessary for a resilient and sustainable Southeast Asia. Counting on advanced climate models to uncover new cyclone risks Unlike traditional studies of historical weather patterns and storms, the researchers tailored computer simulations to manipulate various factors, such as projected increases in human-caused emissions and their impact on a warming planet. The simulations show changes in where cyclones form, strengthen, slow down, and eventually dissipate, providing important insights into the impact of a warming climate on these storms. Study co-author Dr Dhrubajyoti Samanta, Senior Research Fellow at NTU's Earth Observatory of Singapore, said: "By examining storms over an extended period, our study delivers insights that can help governments prepare for future storms and guide community development planning. Leveraging nine global climate models, this study significantly reduces the uncertainty in predicting tropical cyclone changes, which has been a challenge in past studies using just a single model." Study co-author Mackenzie Weaver, from the Department of Earth and Environmental Science at the University of Pennsylvania, said: "Conducting a long-term analysis allows for better understanding of both past and future changes to tropical cyclone tracks, which can inform coastal resilience strategies in both the near-term and more distant future. Asst Prof Garner added: "There were two takeaways: First, we should be acting to reduce emissions, so we can curb the impacts of future storms. Second, we should be acting now to protect those coastlines for the future, which will likely see some worsened tropical cyclone impacts regardless of future emissions." The team of researchers will conduct more detailed studies to better understand extreme weather conditions in the region and further determine how they could impact vulnerable populations.

The study uses a physics-based numerical model to assess the impacts of warming and cooling on firn, the porous layer between snow and glacial ice, over the entire Greenland Ice Sheet. Megan Thompson-Munson, a CIRES and ATOC PhD student, led the study alongside her advisors: CIRES Fellow Jen Kay and INSTAAR Fellow Brad Markle. "The amount of change that occurs within the firn layer due to warming and cooling is not equal in magnitude," Megan Thompson-Munson said. "If we look at thousands or millions of years, we see asymmetric ice sheet behavior overall: Ice sheets can melt away quickly, but take a long time to grow. This firn asymmetry we identify is a small piece of that puzzle." Firn covers about 90 percent of the Greenland Ice Sheet, located at higher elevations where, along with snow, it covers hundreds of meters of ice and acts as a buffer against sea level rise -- making it integral to preserving Arctic glaciers in a warming climate. Firn is porous and spongy, which allows water to pass through on its way to the solid ice layer below, where it can refreeze, adding to the existing ice sheet instead of flowing to the ocean. In this study, researchers found warming temperatures are rapidly changing how efficiently firn can store meltwater, and cooling temperatures may not help the firn fully recover as much as scientists might have hoped. "The warming depletes what we call the 'firn air content' or the 'sponginess," Thompson-Munson said. "So you lose more of the sponginess due to warming than can be regained due to cooling. And it's important because this porous firn can buffer the ice sheet's sea level rise contribution." To understand how firn responds to both warming and cooling temperatures, the team used a physics-based computer model called SNOWPACK, and honed in on one variable: temperature. The study is the first of its kind in two ways. First, researchers looked at the impacts of both warming and cooling temperatures on Greenland firn. Second, the scope of the research covered the entire ice sheet, while previous studies focused on smaller geographical areas. "The Greenland ice sheet loses mass faster under warming than it gains mass under cooling," said Kay. "The key advance of this study is that Greenland's firn contributes to this greater warming-than-cooling asymmetric response." Thompson-Munson said the study brings up an important question regarding geoengineering and the ability to reverse our Earth's warming. Any geoengineering concepts designed to decrease temperatures in the Arctic might not preserve ice and snow as efficiently as imagined; the degree of cooling will have to exceed the degree of warming to help firn and glaciers return to normal. "To get back to initial conditions, we'd have to cool a lot more or start changing other variables a s well," Thompson-Munson said. "It's hard to reverse what we've already done."

In a paper published recently in the American Geophysical Union journal Earth's Future , experts in UC Irvine's Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering caution that relatively new, nation-scale flood data provides an inadequate representation of local topography and infrastructure, factors known to control the spread of floods in urban areas. "In our analysis of Los Angeles County, which has a population greater than 40 U.S. states and includes over 80 separate municipalities, we found that estimates of countywide flood exposure from the nationwide data are actually similar to what we find with our more detailed models. However, predictions of which communities and properties are at risk are markedly different," said lead author Brett Sanders, UC Irvine Chancellor's Professor of civil and environmental engineering and professor of urban planning and public policy. "In addition, these differences between models imply a disparity in exposure inequality across social groups, including Black, white and disadvantaged sectors of society," he said. "Exposure hot spots and social inequalities are key factors that inform urban flood risk planning, and overreliance on this data could lead to maladaptation of protective measures." Sanders and colleagues at UC Irvine and the University of Miami developed a more detailed model named PRIMo-Drain that, they said, improves the accuracy of flood inundation predictions by including fine-resolution topographic data; information about levees and channel conditions; and particulars about stormwater infrastructure such as culverts, subsurface pipes and street drains. "Comparing exposure assessments with nationwide data models versus PRIMo-Drain, we found that city-by-city estimates differed by a factor of 10," Sanders said. "Additionally, we found that there is only a 1-in-4 chance that the nationwide data and UC Irvine data agree on which properties are at risk of more than a foot of flooding from an extreme event." Federal programs to map flood hazards across the U.S. have been unable to keep up with changes in land use and climate, he said, while governments at all levels and the insurance industry urgently need this information to manage risks. "New, nationwide data sources have emerged from the private sector to meet this demand, but unfortunately, these models are missing the level of detail required to map flood risks accurately in urban areas," Sanders said. "New models would benefit from the inclusion of more complete representations of drainage infrastructure such as levees, flood channels, culverts and storm drains, as well as bathymetric and hydrologic data." He and colleagues also point to a new strategy for better nationwide data. "Collaborative flood modeling, with scientists and engineers using cutting-edge regional models in coordination with stakeholders, could create an economy of scale that lowers the overhead necessary to cover less wealthy and smaller communities while increasing flood awareness and preparedness across impacted populations," Sanders said. "Flood risk awareness is critical for participation in flood insurance programs; more accurate data will help insurance companies identify insurable properties; and property owners will be better informed about the cost-effectiveness of flood-proofing." Joining Sanders on this project were Jochen Schubert, a UC Irvine research specialist in civil and environmental engineering, and Katharine Mach of the University of Miami. The team received data assistance from First Street Foundation and high-performance computing support from the NCAR-Wyoming Supercomputing Center, which receives funding from the National Science Foundation.

NbS are interventions where an ecosystem is either preserved, sustainably managed or restored to provide benefits to society and to nature. For instance, they can mitigate risk from a natural disaster, or facilitate climate mitigation and adaptation. NbS have emerged in combination with or as an alternative to engineering-based solutions. A classic example is restoring wetlands to address coastal flooding rather than constructing a seawall. "Nature-based solutions are now recognized by major national policies and international global framework agreements to combat climate change, including those drafted by the U.N. and the White House. However, there has been limited scientific knowledge about the cost-effectiveness and equity outcomes of NbS," says Marta Vicarelli, assistant professor of economics and public policy at UMass Amherst and the study's lead author. "Our results indicate that not only are NbS economically effective in mitigating hazards, but that their benefits are still underestimated." NbS were proven to be a consistently cost-effective approach to mitigating hazards in 71% of the more than 20,000 English-language peer-reviewed studies that researchers examined for the article, which is published in Science of the Total Environment . Another 24% of the studies found NbS to be cost effective under certain conditions. The ecosystem-based interventions most frequently found effective in mitigating hazards are associated with mangroves (80%), forests (77%) and coastal ecosystems (73%). Of the studies that compared NbS with engineering-based solutions, 65% found the former always to be more effective at mitigating hazards and 24% partially more effective. No study found NbS consistently less effective than engineering solutions. While every study reviewed for the article examined the hazard-mitigation benefits of NbS, many did not consider added environmental and socioeconomic benefits, such as maintaining biodiversity, climate mitigation and supporting underserved communities. "The other benefits of NbS are vastly underestimated because they are difficult to quantify," Vicarelli explains. "How should we value improvements in air quality or in soil quality? How should we value the protection of an endangered species or the overall increase in biodiversity after the implementation of an NbS? And how about estimating the cultural or even spiritual value of an environmental asset? These assessments require complex and potentially expensive valuation techniques. For this reason, the additional benefits of NbS are often understudied and underestimated." Another key finding of the research is that NbS have been financed mainly by the public sector, even when the interventions involve private property. For these solutions to have a truly global impact, additional funding is required, and a significant share must come from the private sector, Vicarelli says. "A transformative upscaling of Nature-based Solutions requires both public and private financing," she adds. "The next step is developing innovative nature-based insurance and investment solutions." The research was supported by funding from UMass Amherst and the European Union's Horizon Europe -- the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation.

The northward rain shift would be caused by complex changes in the atmosphere spurred by carbon emissions that influence the formation of the intertropical convergence zones. Those zones are essentially atmospheric engines that drive about a third of the world's precipitation, Liu and his co-authors report in a paper published Friday, June 28, in the journal Nature Climate Change . Tropical regions on either side the equator, such as central African nations, northern South America, and Pacific island states, among other regions, would be the most affected. Major crops grown in the tropics include coffee, cocoa, palm oil, bananas, sugarcane, tea, mangoes, and pineapples. However, the northward shift will last for only about 20 years before greater forces stemming from warming southern oceans pull the convergence zones back southward and keep them there for another millennium, said Wei Liu, an associate professor of climate change and sustainability at UCR's College of Natural and Agricultural Sciences. Intertropical convergence zones are areas along or near the equator where trade winds from the northern and southern hemispheres meet and shoot upward into the cooler elevations, sucking up great volumes of moisture from the oceans. As this humid air cools at higher elevations, thunderclouds form, allowing for drenching rainstorms. Tropical rainforests can have as much as 14 feet of rain a year. "The rainfall change is very important," Liu said. "It's a very heavy rainfall region. So, a small shift will cause big changes in agriculture and the economy of the societies. It will affect many regions." Liu and his colleagues used sophisticated computer models to predict the atmospheric influence of carbon dioxide emissions from continued burning of fossil fuels and other sources, Liu said. "This climate model included many components of the atmosphere, ocean, sea ice, and land. All these components are interacting with each other," he said. "Basically, we try to simulate the real world. In the model, we can increase our carbon dioxide emissions from pre-industrial levels to much higher levels." The analysis accounted for how carbon emissions influence the amount of radiant energy at the top of atmosphere. It also considered changes in sea ice, water vapor and cloud formation. These and other factors resulted in conditions that push the rain-forming convergence zones northward by as much as 0.2 degrees on average. The paper's title is "Contrasting fast and slow intertropical convergence zone migrations linked to delayed Southern Ocean warming." Its co-authors are Shouwei Li of UCR; Chao Li of the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology, Hamburg, Germany; Maria Rugenstein of Colorado State University, Fort Collins; and Antony P. Thomas of UCR.

The recent study found that politics and personal experience played significant roles in people's responses: Self-identified Republicans were less likely than Democrats to attribute extreme weather events to climate change, though Republicans who had personally experienced negative impacts from extreme weather events were more likely to link them to climate change than those who hadn't. Looking at extreme weather events across the board, 83% of survey respondents said there is some link between these events and anthropogenic, or human-caused, climate change. About 17% thought climate change had nothing to do with extreme weather. "There is a growing field of scientific extreme event attribution to climate change, but we know less about what the public thinks," said Hilary Boudet, co-author on the study and an associate professor in OSU's College of Liberal Arts. "This work helps us to better understand public perceptions of event attribution to climate change. What the public thinks is important because these perceptions shape individual behavior and policy support." The study, published in the journal Climatic Change, used data from September 2021 from 1,071 adults across the U.S. who participated in a recurring biweekly AmeriSpeak Omnibus survey. The researchers asked respondents about five different extreme climate events -- wildfires, heat, rainfall/flooding, hurricanes and tornadoes -- and how confident they felt linking the increasing frequency and severity of each event to anthropogenic climate change. Respondents had to rate their confidence on a scale of 1 to 5, so someone who felt absolutely certain that climate change is to blame for increased wildfires would choose "5" for that question. The survey also asked whether respondents had personally experienced any negative impacts from the five different types of extreme weather. Researchers found that more than 47% of people were "very" or "extremely confident" in linking increased wildfires to climate change, and roughly 42% of people were very or extremely confident linking extreme heat to climate change. Out of all five weather event types, Republicans and Democrats were farthest apart on the measure of extreme heat, and closest on hurricanes. Race, education and income also played a role in people's responses. The survey did not ask why respondents chose the numbers they did, but co-author Philip Mote, a professor in OSU's College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences, said researchers have some theories. For example, the impact of wildfires spreads far beyond the physical flames. During the massive wildfires in eastern Canada last year, New Yorkers 1,500 miles away were suffering from poor air quality as a result of smoke drifting from those fires, Mote said. Conversely, hurricanes, tornadoes and floods in the U.S. tend to affect a relatively narrow areas, he said. The study also reported how closely the public attribution of extreme weather events aligned with scientific consensus around extreme weather and climate change. Alignment was weakest on the measure of wildfires; Mote linked this to the narrow scientific definition, which only records the number of extreme fires, rather than overall fire weather. The general public is more likely considering all the hot, dry conditions that contribute to worsening wildfires amid climate change, he said. Researchers say that understanding and improving public perceptions of extreme weather linked to climate change is crucial for maximizing the impact of mitigation efforts, such that resources are directed toward actions that can make a real difference, rather than toward the types of events that trigger the largest public response. Lead author on the study was recent OSU doctoral graduate Chad Zanocco, now at Stanford University. Mote is also the vice provost and dean of OSU's Graduate School.

It is well known that the Arctic is warming faster than the global average, a phenomenon known as Arctic Amplification. But, since 1991, Svalbard has experienced a warming trend that is double the Arcticwide rise in temperature. Consequently, the archipelago has been experiencing massive loss of ice, extreme rainfall events and landslides. "We wanted to know why Svalbard has been warming so much faster than the rest of the Arctic," says Raymond Bradley, Distinguished Professor at UMass Amherst and co-author of the study, "and to figure out whether or not these trends would continue." To do so, they turned to lake sediments from Lake Linné, on the west coast of Svalbard, to help them reconstruct warm and wet conditions during the past 2,000 years. What makes this lake unique is the presence of instruments that have been deployed since 2012 by UMass Amherst alumnus and co-author, Michael Retelle, currently professor of earth and climate sciences at Bates College. These instruments track the precise timing of sediment entering the lake each year. Sediment pours into the lake during the increasingly frequent freak rainstorms. Lapointe and his team looked at the calcium levels in Lake Linné's sediments. Because much of the eastern terrain surrounding the lake is composed of carbonate-rich soil, intense rain events mean that carbonate washes into the lake, settles into the sediment on the lake bottom, and can be measured in sediment cores as a record of rainfall stretching back approximately 2,000 years. When Lapointe and his colleagues compared all these historic and contemporary observations to the meteorological record, they found a stunning correlation. "The biggest rain and warming events of the past are all linked to atmospheric blocking over Scandinavia and the Ural Mountains. Atmospheric blocking is when a high-pressure system, with air rotating clockwise around it, stalls over a particular region -- in this case northern Scandinavia. In tandem with this high-pressure system, rain events in Svalbard are also often associated with a low-pressure system that settles in over Greenland, which rotates counter-clockwise," Lapointe says. The two systems spin like a pair of intermeshed gears, drawing warmer, moister air up from the mid-Atlantic Ocean into the Arctic, leading to downpours of rain in Svalbard. Since observational measurements started, blocking in the Arctic has increased, as has Arctic warming. "It will be very interesting to observe how atmospheric blocking behaves with further warming," adds Lapointe. "Any further increase will likely amplify the effects of floods and natural hazards in Svalbard." Such projections for Svalbard's future are concerning. Though the archipelago has a year-round population of just 2,650, the islands attracted over 130,000 visitors a year, drawn to their breathtaking landscapes and unique wildlife.

New research from Yilan Xu ("E-Lan SHE"), a professor of agricultural and consumer economics at Illinois, found that short but severe episodes of flooding from hurricanes in Texas and Florida triggered an increase in flood insurance sign-ups nationwide depending on how socially connected a county was to the flooded counties. Xu and co-author Sébastien Box-Couillard, a U. of I. graduate student, published the findings in the journal Economic Inquiry . The researchers also found regional climate disasters such as flooding can have a ripple effect on climate change behaviors and beliefs throughout an entire social network for up to three years afterwards. "During natural disasters such as hurricanes, tornadoes and flooding, disaster information spreads fast through social media feeds, lighting up with first-hand evidence such as pictures and video about the event," Xu said. "Ultimately, that information informs people outside of the immediate disaster area and prompts them to change their views about the risks of climate change." For example, when there's bad storms that result in flooding, "people see images of flooding through their social connections on their Facebook feed and think 'Hey, this could happen to me, too,'" Xu said. "The exposure to that risk signal then prompts them to update their previous perceptions about whether climate change can affect them, which subsequently transforms their views on local flood risks and decisions regarding signing up for flood insurance." To measure climate adaptation behavior informed by changes in climate risk perception, the researchers investigated the uptake in flood insurance policies from the National Flood Insurance Program in the aftermath of two major hurricanes: Hurricane Harvey, which made landfall in Houston in August 2017; and Hurricane Irma, which made landfall in Florida in September 2017. Between the two storms, nearly 80,000 homes in the two regions found themselves with at least 18 inches of floodwater. Using the Facebook Social Connectedness Index as a measure of social network adjacency that mediates social learning behaviors, the researchers were able to attribute an additional 250,000 policy sign-ups in flooded counties and an additional 81,000 policy sign-ups in unflooded counties over three years, according to the paper. "Those numbers are fairly robust because flood insurance is not cheap," Xu said. "At the same time, we find no evidence of an overreaction by homeowners to peer flooding, resulting in over-insurance." The increase in the number of flood insurance policies nationwide corresponded to the extent of each county's social network proximity to the flooded areas, Xu said. "The social network may facilitate social learning about climate risks in that when you see family or friends experiencing a disaster, you start to think outside of your own bubble," she said. "Our study sheds light on how social networks can be leveraged to promote timely updates on climate risk perceptions and help correct the underestimation of climate risks." The implications of the research point to leveraging social networks to design educational programs and communication vehicles to promote disaster preparedness, adaptation and loss mitigation, Xu said. "Communication strategies can be designed to enhance information dissemination to the less socially connected communities so that they can be better informed about climate risk and be engaged in climate risk management," she said. Climate change is similar to COVID-19 in that "we're all in this together and what happens in one place can affect others far away," Xu said. "In economics, we call that externality," she said. "A lot of times, a disaster can negatively impact nearby places, which we call a negative externality. But when we learn from a disaster, that's actually a positive externality. Basically, some people unfortunately experience a disaster, but their friends and family who aren't in that area can learn from it and prepare better before a similar disaster hits their own area. "I see that as particularly important in the context of climate change because it's a very politically fraught issue for some people. Even though it can be really difficult for you to convince someone else that climate change is real, if they see their friends and family experiencing its negative consequences, that's a prime opportunity for the skeptics to update their thinking about climate change."

The researchers outlined their recommendations for a justice-oriented approach to urban greening projects in a paper published in the journal Urban Forestry and Urban Greening . "For the environmental and ecological questions, we have a pretty good handle on what we need to do. The questions that are the hardest and the most important for people to tackle are how to work well with communities, particularly marginalized communities," said Rebecca Walker, a co-lead author of the paper and a professor of urban and regional planning at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. The other lead authors of the paper are Kate Derickson, a professor of geography, environment and society at the University of Minnesota and the co-director of the CREATE Initiative to address equitable access to environmental amenities; and Maike Hamann, a lecturer in development and sustainability at the Centre for Geography and Environmental Science at the University of Exeter in the United Kingdom. Green infrastructure can benefit the ecosystem in multiple ways, such as flood and heat mitigation, carbon storage and sequestration, and opportunities for recreation and improvement in mental and physical health, said the researchers. But urban landscapes are unequal in the distribution of environmental benefits and harms. For example, water quality standards for rivers in St. Louis, Missouri, reflect the city's racial geographies, with waterways in white neighborhoods historically managed for recreation and those in Black neighborhoods historically managed for industrial uses. Today the water quality standards for bodies of water in white neighborhoods remain higher than for those in Black neighborhoods, according to the paper. "Plans must contend with the histories of discriminatory policies and practices that produced underlying inequalities, and be attentive to the ways that contemporary efforts might reproduce or undermine the structures driving inequities in urban greenspace. This is true for new greenspace developments, as well as changes to existing urban nature," the researchers wrote. A variety of disciplines need to contribute to urban green infrastructure, including those that ask questions about the social implications of ecological and economic projects, they said. "If they are already disproportionately located near more advantaged communities, as we invest and expand in those areas, the inequities get doubled down," Walker said. Among the factors that planners should consider is the scale of a project and how a particular community might be affected by a project, the researchers said. For example, a wetlands mitigation program in Mississippi allowed developers to fill in wetlands in one location while buying wetland mitigation credits elsewhere. Residents of the small, Black community of Turkey Creek, Mississippi, argued that the practice harmed their neighborhood, which was hit hard by Hurricane Katrina, by removing wetlands that could absorb stormwater. "This suggests that … attempting to address large-scale issues (such as global climate change) cannot be done equitably without careful attention to local-scale issues (such as neighborhood flooding)," the researchers wrote. Their research emphasizes the importance of building relationships with communities and accepting uncertainty about the outcomes of their work. While Derickson and Walker were working with a community on water quality and flooding issues, the community members repeatedly raised concerns about gentrification related to green infrastructure solutions. The researchers shifted their focus and developed an antigentrification toolkit offering ways to invest in urban greening without driving displacement of residents. Being open to ambiguity in defining a problem led to a new opportunity for their work to lead to justice-oriented policies, they said. Finally, the researchers advocate for an approach that promotes modest projects that address the needs and priorities of a community's residents and allows them to help shape the projects over large developer-oriented infrastructure investments. "While the uptake of urban green infrastructure represents a promising development in urban sustainability and development practices, it cannot be assumed that these projects will benefit all residents or promote urban equity. Indeed, the history of urban development and infrastructure projects shows that there is a tendency for such projects to consolidate benefits for powerful groups, often at the expense of the vulnerable or marginalized," the researchers wrote.

Using a large climate dataset called CMIP6, BAS researchers investigated this unprecedented sea ice loss. They analysed data from 18 different climate models to understand the probability of such a significant reduction in sea ice and its connection to climate change. Lead author Rachel Diamond explained that while 2023's extreme low sea ice was made more likely by climate change, it was still considered very rare according to the models. She says: "This is the first time this large set of climate models has been used to find out how unlikely 2023's low sea ice actually was. We only have forty-five years of satellite measurements of sea ice, which makes it extremely difficult to evaluate changes in sea ice extent. This is where climate models come into their own. According to the models, the record-breaking minimum sea ice extent would be a one-in-a-2000-year event without climate change. This tells us that the event was very extreme -- anything less than one-in-100 is considered exceptionally unlikely." Caroline Holmes, a co-author on the study, said: "Strong climate change -- i.e. the temperature changes we're already seeing, and those expected if emissions continue to rise rapidly -- in the models makes it four times more likely that we see such a big decline in sea ice extent. This suggests that 2023's extreme low was made more likely by climate change." The researchers also used the models to look at how well sea ice is likely to recover. By looking at similar events in the models, the authors found that after such extreme sea ice loss, not all of the sea ice around Antarctica returns -- even after twenty years. This adds model evidence to existing observational evidence that the last few years' low sea ice could signal a lasting regime shift in the Southern Ocean. Louise Sime, a co-author on the study, says: "The impacts of Antarctic sea ice staying low for over twenty years would be profound, including on local and global weather and on unique Southern Ocean ecosystems -- including whales and penguins." Satellite records of Antarctic sea ice began in late 1978 and between then and 2015, Antarctic sea ice extent increased slightly and steadily. In 2017, Antarctic sea ice reached a record low, and has been followed by several years of relatively low sea ice extent. There are many complex and interacting factors that influence Antarctic sea ice, making it hard to get a clear understanding of why 2023 was such a record-breaking year. Recent studies have highlighted the important role of ocean processes and heat stored below the surface, and warm sea surface temperatures during the first half of 2023 may also have contributed. Strong variations in north-to-south winds and storm systems also played a role. Antarctic sea ice is a critical factor in our overall understanding of climate change. Sea ice formation around the Antarctic acts as an engine for ocean currents and influences weather patterns. It also protects the exposed edges of the ice shelves from waves, curbing Antarctica's contribution to sea level rise. Sea ice is also vitally important for marine life -- scientists have observed catastrophic breeding failures of emperor penguin colonies because of low sea ice in recent years. Studies like this one are therefore critical to find out how likely rapid sea-ice losses are, and if sea ice is likely to stay low over the coming decades.

In a study published today in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , the UC Irvine-led team said that widespread contact between ocean water and the glacier -- a process that is replicated throughout Antarctica and in Greenland -- causes "vigorous melting" and may require a reassessment of global sea level rise projections. The glaciologists relied on data gathered from March to June of 2023 by Finland's ICEYE commercial satellite mission. The ICEYE satellites form a "constellation" in polar orbit around the planet, using InSAR -- interferometer synthetic aperture radar -- to persistently monitor changes on the Earth's surface. Many passes by a spacecraft over a small, defined area render smooth data results. In the case of this study, it showed the rise, fall and bending of Thwaites Glacier. "These ICEYE data provided a long-time series of daily observations closely conforming to tidal cycles," said lead author Eric Rignot, UC Irvine professor of Earth system science. "In the past, we had some sporadically available data, and with just those few observations it was hard to figure out what was happening. When we have a continuous time series and compare that with the tidal cycle, we see the seawater coming in at high tide and receding and sometimes going farther up underneath the glacier and getting trapped. Thanks to ICEYE, we're beginning to witness this tidal dynamic for the first time." ICEYE Director of Analytics Michael Wollersheim, co-author, said, "Until now, some of the most dynamic processes in nature have been impossible to observe with sufficient detail or frequency to allow us to understand and model them. Observing these processes from space and using radar satellite images, which provide centimeter-level precision InSAR measurements at daily frequency, marks a significant leap forward." Rignot said the project helped him and his colleagues develop a better understanding of the behavior of seawater on undersides of Thwaites Glacier. He said that seawater coming in at the base of the ice sheet, combined with freshwater generated by geothermal flux and friction, builds up and "has to flow somewhere." Water is distributed through natural conduits or collects in cavities, creating enough pressure to elevate the ice sheet. "There are places where the water is almost at the pressure of the overlying ice, so just a little more pressure is needed to push up the ice," Rignot said. "The water is then squeezed enough to jack up a column of more than half a mile of ice." And it's not just any seawater. For decades, Rignot and his colleagues have been gathering evidence of the impact of climate change on ocean currents, which push warmer seawater to the shores of Antarctica and other polar ice regions. Circumpolar deep water is salty and has a lower freezing point. While freshwater freezes at zero degrees Celsius, saltwater freezes at minus two degrees, and that small difference is enough to contribute to the "vigorous melting" of basal ice as found in the study. Co-author Christine Dow, professor in the Faculty of Environment at the University of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada, said, "Thwaites is the most unstable place in the Antarctic and contains the equivalent of 60 centimeters of sea level rise. The worry is that we are underestimating the speed that the glacier is changing, which would be devastating for coastal communities around the world." Rignot said that he hopes and expects the results of this project to spur further research on the conditions beneath Antarctic glaciers, exhibitions involving autonomous robots and more satellite observations. "There is a lot of enthusiasm from the scientific community to go to these remote, polar regions to gather data and build our understanding of what's happening, but the funding is lagging," he said. "We operate at the same budget in 2024 in real dollars that we were in the 1990s. We need to grow the community of glaciologists and physical oceanographers to address these observation issues sooner rather than later, but right now we're still climbing Mount Everest in tennis shoes." In the near term, Rignot, who is also a senior project scientist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said this study will provide a lasting benefit to the ice sheet modeling community. "If we put this type of ocean-ice interaction into ice sheet models, I expect we will be able to do a much better job of reproducing what has happened in the past quarter century, which will lead to a higher level of confidence in our projections," he said. "If we could add this process we outlined in the paper, which is not included in most current models, the model reconstructions should match observations much better. It would be a big win if we could achieve that." Dow added, "At the moment we don't have enough information to say one way or the other how much time there is before the oceanwater intrusion is irreversible. By improving the models and focusing our research on these critical glaciers, we will try to get these numbers at least pinned down for decades versus centuries. This work will help people adapt to changing ocean levels, along with focusing on reducing carbon emissions to prevent the worst-case scenario." Rignot, Dow and Wollershiem were joined in this project by Enrico Ciraci, UC Irvine assistant specialist in Earth system science and NASA postdoctoral fellow; Bernd Scheuchl, UC Irvine researcher in Earth system science; and ICEYE's Valentyn Tolpekin. ICEYE is headquartered in Finland and operates from five international locations, including the United States. The research received financial support from NASA and the National Science Foundation.

In a Personal View article, published in The Lancet Neurology , the team emphasise the urgent need to understand the impact of climate change on people with neurological conditions -- in order to preserve their health and prevent worsening inequalities. Following a review of 332 papers published across the world between 1968 and 2023, the team, led by Professor Sanjay Sisodiya (UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology), said they expect the scale of the potential effects of climate change on neurological diseases to be substantial. They considered 19 different nervous system conditions, chosen on the basis of the Global Burden of Disease 2016 study, including stroke, migraine, Alzheimer's, meningitis, epilepsy and multiple sclerosis. The team also analysed the impact of climate change on several serious but common psychiatric disorders, including anxiety, depression and schizophrenia. Professor Sisodiya, who is also Director of Genomics at the Epilepsy Society and a founding member of Epilepsy Climate Change, said: "There is clear evidence for an impact of the climate on some brain conditions, especially stroke and infections of the nervous system. "The climatic variation that was shown to have an effect on brain diseases included extremes of temperature (both low and high), and greater temperature variation throughout the course of day -- especially when these measures were seasonally unusual. "Nighttime temperatures may be particularly important, as higher temperatures through the night can disrupt sleep. Poor sleep is known to aggravate a number of brain conditions." The researchers found that there was an increase in admissions, disability or mortality as a result of a stroke in higher ambient temperatures or heatwaves. Meanwhile, the team state that people with dementia are susceptible to harm from extremes of temperature (e.g. heat-related illness or hypothermia) and weather events (e.g. flooding or wildfires), as cognitive impairment can limit their ability to adapt behaviour to environmental changes. They write: "Reduced awareness of risk is combined with a diminished capacity to seek help or to mitigate potential harm, such as by drinking more in hot weather or by adjusting clothing. "This susceptibility is compounded by frailty, multimorbidity, and psychotropic medications. Accordingly, greater temperature variation, hotter days, and heatwaves lead to increased dementia-associated hospital admissions and mortality." In addition, incidence, hospital admissions, and mortality risk for many mental health disorders are associated with increased ambient temperature, daily fluctuations in temperature, or extreme hot and cold temperatures. The researchers note that as adverse weather events increase in severity and global temperatures rise, populations are being exposed to worsening environmental factors that may not have been severe enough to affect brain conditions in some of the earlier studies they reviewed as part of the analysis. As a result, they say it's important to ensure that research is up to date and considers not only the present state of climate change but also the future. Professor Sisodiya said: "This work is taking place against a worrying worsening of climatic conditions and it will need to remain agile and dynamic if it is to generate information that is of use to both individuals and organisations. "Moreover, there are few studies estimating health consequences on brain diseases under future climate scenarios, making forward planning challenging." He added: "The whole concept of climate anxiety is an added, potentially weighty, influence: many brain conditions are associated with higher risk of psychiatric disorders, including anxiety, and such multimorbidities can further complicate impacts of climate change and the adaptations necessary to preserve health. But there are actions we can and should take now." The new article is published ahead of The Hot Brain 2: climate change and brain health event, which is led by Professor Sisodiya and jointly organised by UCL and The Lancet Neurology. The aims of the meeting are to raise awareness about the risks of climate change for the brain and neurological healthcare, to nurture global collaborative research, and to promote action against climate change and foster adaptation strategies. The research was funded by the Epilepsy Society and the National Brain Appeal Innovation Fund.

This occurs because the pressure from the ice above decreases, causing the land beneath to rise. This elevation change can be measured and translated into how much ice disappears from Greenland's ice sheet and how fast it's happening. Now, researchers at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) have developed a method based on this principle, allowing daily tracking of ice melt for the first time. "This is the first time we can measure the entire mass loss of the ice sheet day by day. For example, satellite gravity measurements show mass loss every month. Other methods only provide a single estimate per year. This means that we have not been able to monitor the sudden changes in ice mass loss that often occur in the summer period," explains senior researcher at DTU Space, Valentina Barletta. She has led the work on the new innovative method, which has just been published in an article in the scientific journal Geophysical Research Letters . Greenland is losing about 5 cubic kilometre of ice per week on average, based on data from the last 20 years. This is equivalent to draining Denmark's largest lake, Arresø, 40 times a week. The new GPS method represents a significant advancement in monitoring ice mass loss in Greenland and understanding the processes behind the ice melting. Consequently, entities like the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) can get better estimates for future ice sheet melting and the contribution of meltwater to the rise of global sea levels. The measurements can be used for flood warnings in Greenland The new system and the estimates of ice loss can also be used for practical purposes, such as warning residents in Greenland if large amounts of meltwater are suddenly released. "By calculating daily changes in the ice sheet's mass, we can monitor the melting season and warn the local population if there is a risk of flooded rivers. For example in 2012, the bridge collapsed at Kangerlussuaq, also known as Søndre Strømfjord, due to extreme melting. With the new GPS-based method, we can better monitor and potentially warn if such events are imminent," explains DTU Space professor Shfaqat Abbas Khan, who has also contributed to developing the new method. Data provided by state measurement stations in Greenland Measurements are made using the Danish state's GNET, which consists of 61 GNSS stations located around Greenland. GNSS stands for the Global Navigation Satellite System, and it includes the American GPS system and the European Galileo. With GNSS technology, movements in the bedrock over time can be detected with sub-millimetre precision. "We are pleased that data from the GNET stations is so widely used and gives us new opportunities to accurately monitor climate change in Greenland. For example, with the new measurement method developed by DTU. Therefore, we make a major effort to maintain and improve these measurement stations," says Malte Nordmann Winther-Dahl, project manager for GNET at the Danish Geodata Agency, which is part of the Ministry of Climate, Energy and Utilities. SDFI owns GNET, which is operated in collaboration with DTU. So far, researchers and thus the IPCC have typically used three different methods to measure ice mass loss: Gravity changes measured by NASA's GRACE satellites, which can be converted into mass changes and ice loss. Direct changes in ice elevation measured by altimetry satellites; and measurement of ice movements via satellite and thus how much ice streams change over time. The faster the ice moves into the ocean, the more ice is lost from the ice sheet. The study and the new method have been developed in collaboration between DTU Space and DTU Computing Center, located at DTU Compute. The centre's expertise and computing power have been crucial for handling large amounts of GPS data and running simulations in the project.

Previous methods have used rainfall totals to indicate the presence of surface water suitable for breeding mosquitoes, but the research led by the University of Leeds used several climatic and hydrological models to include real-world processes of evaporation, infiltration and flow through rivers. This groundbreaking approach has created a more in-depth picture of malaria-friendly conditions on the African continent. It has also highlighted the role of waterways such as the Zambezi River in the spread of the disease with almost four times the population estimated to live in areas suitable for malaria for up to nine months of the year than was previously thought. The research entitled "Future malaria environmental suitability in Africa is sensitive to hydrology" was funded by the Natural Environment Research Council and is published today (9 May 2024) in the journal Science . Dr Mark Smith an Associate Professor in Water Research in the Leeds' School of Geography and lead author of the study said: "This will give us a more physically realistic estimate of where in Africa is going to become better or worse for malaria. "And as increasingly detailed estimates of water flows become available, we can use this understanding to direct prioritisation and tailoring of malaria interventions in a more targeted and informed way. This is really useful given the scarce health resources that are often available." Malaria is a climate-sensitive vector-borne disease that caused 608,000 deaths among 249 million cases in 2022. 95% of global cases are reported in Africa but reductions in cases there have slowed or even reversed in recent years, attributed in part to a stall in investments in global responses to malaria control. The researchers predict that the hot and dry conditions brought about by climate change will lead to an overall decrease in areas suitable for malaria transmission from 2025 onwards. The new hydrology-driven approach also shows that changes in malaria suitability are seen in different places and are more sensitive to future greenhouse gas emissions than previously thought. For example, projected reductions in malaria suitability across West Africa are more extensive than rainfall-based models suggested, stretching as far east as South Sudan, whereas projected increases in South Africa are now seen to follow watercourses such as the Orange River. Co-author of the study Professor Chris Thomas from the University of Lincoln said: "The key advancement is that these models factor in that not all water stays where it rains, and this means breeding conditions suitable for malaria mosquitoes too can be more widespread -- especially along major river floodplains in the arid, savannah regions typical of many regions in Africa. "What is surprising in the new modelling is the sensitivity of season length to climate change -- this can have dramatic effects on the amount of disease transmitted." Simon Gosling, Professor of Climate Risks & Environmental Modelling at the University of Nottingham, co-authored the study and helped to coordinate the water modelling experiments used in the research. He said: "Our study highlights the complex way that surface water flows change the risk of malaria transmission across Africa, made possible thanks to a major research programme conducted by the global hydrological modelling community to compile and make available estimates of climate change impacts on water flows across the planet. "Although an overall reduction in future risk of malaria might sound like good news, it comes at a cost of reduced water availability and a greater risk of another significant disease, dengue." The researchers hope that further advances in their modelling will allow for even finer details of waterbody dynamics which could help to inform national malaria control strategies. Dr Smith added: "We're getting to the point soon where we use globally available data to not only say where the possible habitats are, but also which species of mosquitoes are likely to breed where, and that would allow people to really target their interventions against these insects."

The new study was led by experts at Newcastle University and the Met Office and investigated how future climate change may influence compound wind-rain extremes, which are events where extreme wind and rainfall occur simultaneously. The researchers analysed data from climate simulations covering control (1981-2000) and future (2060-2081) periods, to assess potential changes in these extreme events. Their findings show that, as the climate warms, these events are likely to become more severe, with stronger winds and heavier rainfall happening together. These changes are mainly driven by increased rainfall, a thermodynamic response to rising temperatures. Additional contributing factors include a strengthened jet stream and its southward displacement that brings storms through warmer areas leading to further increases in rainfall. Publishing their findings in the journal Weather and Climate Extremes, the scientists show that the increase in intensity could lead to more frequent windstorms coinciding with extreme rainfall and floods, posing challenges to coastal areas susceptible to compound flooding as well as emergency response resources due to larger aggregation of separate impacts to infrastructure such as electricity networks and rail transport networks. Study lead author, Dr Colin Manning, Research Associate at Newcastle University's School of Engineering and Visiting Scientist, Met Office, Hadley Centre, said: "Our work shows that such compound extremes will occur more frequently as our climate warms and likely bring more severe impacts, and a higher aggregation of separate damages arising from wind and flooding which may stretch emergency response resources. Avoiding the worst of these impacts will require cutting our greenhouse gas emissions and increasing the resilience of our infrastructure." The team used a number of methods to analyse compound wind-rain extremes and their future changes. They used an event-based analysis based on the occurrence of an extra-tropical cyclone (ETC) over the UK and Ireland. By linking extreme wind and rainfall events to these systems, the scientists assessed their severity using Wind Severity Index (WSI) and Rainfall Severity Index (RSI). Return periods (RPs) were estimated for both individual and joint extremes, indicating their likelihood, while the team categorised events based on their wind and rainfall characteristics. In addition, the researchers identified local co-occurrences of extreme wind gusts and rainfall to understand their changing intensity contributions in future simulations. Professor Lizzie Kendon, Head of Understanding Climate Change at the Met Office and co-author on the paper, said: "This work exploits the latest high resolution climate projections for the UK, UKCP Local, where the Met Office weather forecast model has been run to give 100-y long climate projections at km-scale. These are providing new insights into how the UK climate may change at the very local scale, and how changes in weather extremes may be realised over the coming years and decades. This is highlighting the importance of considering compounding effects, including co-occurrences of different hazards, as well as the clustering of extreme events, in fully capturing the potential impacts of climate change." This research sets the stage for further investigation into the mechanisms driving compound wind-rain extremes. Future research will need to consider a greater range of climate models to understand if the results are robust across different models. Research is also required to understand and quantify the link between these compound extremes and the resultant impacts which would help stakeholders better understand their risk and choose the most cost-effective adaptations to reduce risks. The research was supported and funded by UKRI NERC funded STORMY-WEATHER project (NE/V004166/1).

Published in the journal Nature , "Sister cities for the Anthropocene" by professors Cymene Howe and Dominic Boyer explores the connectivity of "sister cities," broad-based, long-term, legal or social partnerships between two similar-sized communities in two countries. The original Sister Cities International program was born out of the aftermath of World War II and fears of nuclear conflict in the 1950s. Historically, these relationships have centered on social and political factors like trade relationships, diplomacy and more. But Howe and Boyer believe they can be powerful tools to aid in dealing with the physical effects of climate change, especially as cities deal with things like wildfires, extreme storms and more. As a result, they recommend forming a network called "Sister Cities for the Anthropocene" to help track and raise awareness of the spread of related impacts and responses to climate-related disasters in urban communities across the world. "The idea of this network is to create relationships and networks that help formulate ideas and best practices to cope with the consequences of climate change that are already with us, including the effects of natural disasters," Howe said. "This network also takes into account the consequences that we know are coming in the future," Boyer said. "We know that we will have more extreme storms, more drought andmore wildfires. We want to prevent as many of those terrible effects as we can." Howe and Boyer wrote that in regions affected by chronic wildfire and droughts, "sister cities" might learn how other urban communities are assessing predictions of a hotter, drier future and making plans to adapt. In areas where flooding, sea-level rise or extreme storms increasingly threaten residents, "sister cities" can look at what responses have been initiated by nongovernmental organizations, community groups and media organizations and how the outcomes and impacts of these initiatives compare. Howe said that while it is encouraging that many city leaders, urban professionals and residents are already talking about climate change, related disasters and mitigation strategies, this network would formalize relationships between cities and bring more public attention to the effects of climate change. Howe and Boyer's research is supported by the National Science Foundation's Arctic Social Sciences Program in the Office of Polar Programs (award No. 2030474).

An international team of Dutch, Chinese, Danish, British, and Czech scientists studied sediments from Northern-Germany in a drill-core (Schandelah-1) that spans the uppermost Triassic to lower Jurassic for microfossils and geochemical signals. A study of pollen and spore abundances revealed a profusion of fern spores showing a range of malformations, from abnormalities in wall structure to evidence for botched meiotic divisions, leading to unseparated, dwarfed, and fused fern spores. "Seeing the sheer amount and different types of malformed fern spores in sediment samples from a coastal lagoon, dating back 201 million years ago is truly astonishing. It means there must have been very many ferns being stressed," explains Remco Bos, a PhD candidate at Utrecht University and lead author of the study. "It is also not something we see regularly during other periods that also contain many fern fossils, making it a true signal connected to the end-Triassic mass-extinction event." Deforestation and ferns The results from Bos and co-authors confirm earlier work by co-authors Sofie Lindström (University of Copenhagen), Hamed Sanei (Aarhus University), and Bas van de Schootbrugge (Utrecht University), who previously produced similar data obtained from cores from Denmark and from nearby outcrops in Sweden. According to Sofie Lindström: "Ferns replaced trees across the extinction interval in response to dramatic environmental changes likely driven by heat stress, strongly increased monsoonal rainfall, and increased forest fire activity. Palynological results show that a pioneering fern vegetation spread across vast swaths of coastal lowlands in Northwestern Europe from Sweden and Denmark to Germany, France, Luxemburg, and Austria in response to widespread deforestation." Ferns are hardy plants, often colonizing disturbed environments, including newly formed volcanic islands or landscapes devastated by volcanism or wildfires. "What is extraordinary here is that the ferns that produced all these malformed spores in all these different sites, did not go extinct. While other plants went extinct, ferns were apparently robust enough to continue, which could also be related to their different mercury tolerance." Climate variability In this new study, Bos and co-authors show that the ferns, which took advantage of the dieback of forests, themselves were subjected to stress from Hg-pollution well beyond the immediate extinction interval. "We found four more intervals with high levels of Hg concentrations and high numbers of malformed spores in the 1.3 to 2 million years following the extinction interval," explains Remco Bos. This interval, known as the Hettangian, was a time of continuing adverse conditions in the oceans, with generally low diversities among marine invertebrates, such as ammonites and bivalves. On land, however, vegetation appeared to have recovered quicker. "We now show that this forest ecosystem continued to be perturbed repeatedly for at least 1.3 million years, but perhaps as long as 2 million years," Bos explains. The four additional episodes of high Hg concentrations and high fern spore malformations were unlikely connected to later phases of Central Atlantic Magmatic Province volcanism. Instead, Bos and co-authors show that these periods correspond closely to the long eccentricity cycle, the major variation in the shape of Earth's orbit that moves Earth closer or further away from the Sun every 405 thousand years. During eccentricity maxima Earth moves closer to the Sun allowing for more sunlight to reach the Earth surface. As the Earth's atmosphere was already supercharged with carbon dioxide from the large-scale volcanism, this cyclic modulation of the climate system repeatedly triggered forest dieback, allowing for the renewed spread of pioneer ferns. As is shown by the correlation with high Hg contents, malformations in fern spores during these episodes were also the result of mercury poisoning. But where did this Hg come from? Hg-isotopes A crucial data set was generated at Tianjin University (China) by Wang Zheng, a co-corresponding author and geochemist specialized in metal isotope studies, especially Hg-isotopes. Mercury has different stable isotopes that behave differently in the environment. During reactions in nature, for example the expulsion from volcanism, deposition from the atmosphere, and the uptake by organisms, Hg-isotopes can become fractionated, enriching one pool in heavier isotopes, and others in lighter isotopes. Sediments with elevated levels of Hg and malformed spores also show clear variations in Hg-isotopes. "Based on the Hg-isotope variations we were able to link an initial pulse in Hg enrichment at the Triassic-Jurassic boundary to the emission of mercury from flood basalt volcanism," Wang Zheng explains. "However, the four other pulses in mercury had a different isotopic composition, indicating they were mainly driven by Hg input from soil erosion and photochemical reduction." Climate change and toxic pollution The combined geochemical and microfossil data thus paint a picture of a much more complex and drawn-out sequence of events, starting with massive volcanism driving climate change and releasing toxic pollutants, followed by episodic pulses of disturbance in the aftermath of the extinction event lasting for at least 1.3 million years. Dr. Tomas Navratil from the Czech Academy of Sciences, a co-author on the paper and a specialist for modern-day mercury pollution, agrees with this scenario. "Our work on polluted sites in the Czech Republic does show evidence for episodic remobilization from forest soils, especially during hot summers, and in places that are more exposed to sunlight causing the photochemical reduction of mercury and re-release to the atmosphere of previously stored mercury." "We know that mass-extinction events were complex and long-lasting events. Here we show that a mix of greenhouse warming and pollution led to continued ecosystem perturbation. Coastal ecosystems likely suffered the most by receiving large amounts of mobilized mercury from vast catchment areas. Eventually, the system recovered during the Sinemurian, when we see stable forested biomes appear. It is likely that by that time, Earth had cleaned up the mess, carbon dioxide levels went down, and mercury was buried for good in offshore marine sediments," Bos concludes.

"Coastal management strategies intended to protect people, property and infrastructure from storm impacts can, over decades, increase vulnerability, even leading to the loss of barrier islands, especially as sea-level rise rates increase," said A. Brad Murray, professor of geomorphology and coastal processes at Duke University's Nicholas School of the Environment. He and other researchers in North Carolina created a computer model that simulates dynamics of barrier island systems over the next two centuries, showing how natural processes that create and maintain these systems affect communities and infrastructure, and how human efforts to protect communities and infrastructure, in turn, affect those natural processes. They published a pair of studies on the work April 9, 2024 in Earth Futures. Barrier islands are narrow offshore landforms that run parallel to the mainland coastline. These are dynamic features, naturally gaining elevation and migrating landward as sea level rises or sediment supply dwindles. Barrier islands absorb wave energy before waves hit the mainland, which can lessen coastal storm surge and flooding. The United States has the greatest extent of barriers worldwide, stretching across much of the Southeast and Gulf of Mexico. Coastal communities on barrier islands, which have long grappled with eroding shorelines and coastal storms, now face substantial sea-level rise due to climate change. They are already encountering increased risks of coastal flooding and threats to critical infrastructure. Many of these coastal communities rely on federally subsidized "beach nourishment" -- the artificial widening of beaches with sand -- or engineered solutions, such as the construction of artificially high dunes, to adapt to changing climate threats. Some of these solutions, however, interrupt natural processes that have kept barriers above sea level. Sand deposited on these islands when storm waves knock down dunes is essential to maintain barriers' width and elevation. But on developed barriers, storm fallout -- including overwashed sand on roads -- are hazards. "Counterintuitively, the more successful humans are in preventing storm impacts, the less resilient the barrier system becomes in the long term," said co-author, Laura Moore, professor of coastal geomorphology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. "Difficult tradeoffs are going to be inevitable when it comes to managing the coast with the hope of preserving coastal living as we know it." The researchers' modelling demonstrates that how long a barrier remains habitable varies with different coastal management strategies and climate scenarios. For example, the model showed that shifting away from the practices of protecting roads with tall dunes and bulldozing overwashed sand off paved surfaces may allow barriers that would have become uninhabitable to rebound and keep up with sea level rise longer. Adopting management strategies that allow one segment of the shoreline to evolve naturally -- such as building a long bridge to replace part of a highway -- can increase the barrier system's resilience in that area. However, management strategies in one area affect erosion rates in adjacent areas. Increasing long-term resilience in one area can come at the cost of higher shoreline stabilization costs for neighboring communities. Given these connections along the shore, stakeholders in neighboring coastal areas may benefit from collaborating, the authors noted. "There's no perfect solution," said the study's lead author, Katherine Anarde, assistant professor of coastal engineering at North Carolina State University. "Understanding an entire barrier system and how it responds to different coastal management decisions is critical to assessing the sustainability of coastal development over the coming decades. The model helps us consider several factors in managing coastal areas to ensure we're not unintentionally making things worse in the long run, and to weigh the tradeoffs." The National Science Foundation, University of Virginia, and the Gulf Research Program Early-Career Research Fellowship co-funded this study.

"Historically we see the highest levels of fecal bacteria contamination in coastal waterways after it rains, because the rain washes contaminants into the waterways," says Natalie Nelson, corresponding author of a paper on the study and an associate professor of biological and agricultural engineering at North Carolina State University. "Due to sea level rise, we're seeing an increase in flooding in coastal areas at high tide -- even when there isn't any rainfall. We wanted to see whether sunny day floods were associated with increases in fecal bacteria contamination in waterways." For the study, researchers collected water samples every day for two summer months at three sites along a single waterway in coastal North Carolina. Two perigean spring tides occurred during the two-month sampling period. Perigean spring tides are tides characterized by especially pronounced high and low tides, caused by the moon's gravitational pull. The researchers increased their collection of samples at each monitoring site on the days of the perigean spring tides, to capture changes in water quality throughout the tidal cycle. During the high-water levels of the perigean spring tides, water also came up out of some local storm drains and caused minor flooding. The researchers took samples of those floodwaters as well. "We found that the floodwaters themselves had relatively high levels of fecal bacteria," Nelson says. "To be clear, these floods were inches deep; we're talking about very minor flooding as tidal waters pushed up through the storm grates. However, we've seen children playing in these sort of sunny day floodwaters, and the levels of fecal bacteria we detected were above the levels deemed safe for recreational waters." "Our findings with regard to the coastal waters were more nuanced," says Megan Carr, lead author of the study and a Ph.D. student at NC State. "On the one hand, we did see higher concentrations of fecal bacteria in coastal waters as the floodwaters and perigean spring tides receded. On the other hand, we did not see this in every instance and in every location -- and we also found that the higher concentrations of fecal bacteria usually only lasted for a few hours." In other words, perigean spring tides do raise some concerns about fecal bacteria and water quality in coastal waters, but they don't appear to cause concentrations of fecal bacteria at the same level as stormwater runoff caused by rainfall. "It's important to note that these results are from samples that we took in one area along a large waterway," Nelson says. "The results are likely to vary significantly, depending on the size of the waterway. For example, post-flood contamination could last longer in waterways smaller than the waterway that we sampled. That's something that would benefit from additional research. "Sea levels are going to continue rising for the foreseeable future," Nelson says. "So we are definitely going to see more sunny day flooding, and those floods will be getting worse. We need to continue studying the impact that these tidal floods have on our water quality, because the more we understand, the better able we will be to make informed decisions about public health and safety." The paper, "Fecal Bacteria Contamination of Floodwaters and a Coastal Waterway from Tidally-Driven Stormwater Network Inundation," is published in the open-access journal GeoHealth . First author of the paper is Megan Carr, a Ph.D. student at NC State. The paper was co-authored by Angela Harris and Katherine Anarde, both assistant professors of civil, construction and environmental engineering at NC State; Nora Sauers, Gabe Da Silva and Catherine Gamewell, who are undergraduates at NC State; Adam Gold of the Environmental Defense Fund; and Miyuki Hino of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The research was done with support from the National Science Foundation, under grant number 2047609; and from the U.S. Geological Survey Southeast Climate Adaptation Science Center.

Writing in the journal Science, Prof Robert Nicholls of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research at UEA and Prof Manoochehr Shirzaei of Virginia Tech and United Nations University for Water, Environment and Health, Ontario, highlight the importance of a new research paper analysing satellite data that accurately and consistently maps land movement across China. While they say in their comment article that consistently measuring subsidence is a great achievement, they argue it is only the start of finding solutions. Predicting future subsidence requires models that consider all drivers, including human activities and climate change, and how they might change with time. The research paper, published in the same issue, considers 82 cities with a collective population of nearly 700 million people. The results show that 45% of the urban areas that were analysed are sinking, with 16% falling at a rate of 10mm a year or more. Nationally, roughly 270 million urban residents are estimated to be affected, with nearly 70 million experiencing rapid subsidence of 10mm a year or more. Hotspots include Beijing and Tianjin. Coastal cities such as Tianjin are especially affected as sinking land reinforces climate change and sea-level rise. The sinking of sea defences is one reason why Hurricane Katrina's flooding brought such devastation and death-toll to New Orleans in 2005. Shanghai -- China's biggest city -- has subsided up to 3m over the past century and continues to subside today. When subsidence is combined with sea-level rise, the urban area in China below sea level could triple in size by 2120, affecting 55 to 128 million residents. This could be catastrophic without a strong societal response. "Subsidence jeopardises the structural integrity of buildings and critical infrastructure and exacerbates the impacts of climate change in terms of flooding, particularly in coastal cities where it reinforces sea-level rise," said Prof Nicholls, who was not involved in the study, but whose research focusses on sea-level rise, coastal erosion and flooding, and how communities can adapt to these changes. The subsidence is mainly caused by human action in the cities. Groundwater withdrawal, that lowers the water table is considered the most important driver of subsidence, combined with geology and weight of buildings. In Osaka and Tokyo, groundwater withdrawal was stopped in the 1970s and city subsidence has ceased or greatly reduced showing this is an effective mitigation strategy. Traffic vibration and tunnelling is potentially also a local contributing factor -- Beijing has sinking of 45mm a year near subways and highways. Natural upward or downward land movement also occurs but is generally much smaller than human induced changes. While human-induced subsidence was known in China before this study, Profs Nicholls and Shirzaei say these new results reinforce the need for a national response. This problem happens in susceptible cities outside China and is a widespread problem across the world. They call for the research community to move from measurement to understanding implications and supporting responses. The new satellite measurements are delivering new detailed subsidence data but the methods to use this information to work with city planners to address these problems needs much more development. Affected coastal cities in China and more widely need particular attention. "Many cities and areas worldwide are developing strategies for managing the risks of climate change and sea-level rise," said Prof Nicholls. "We need to learn from this experience to also address the threat of subsidence which is more common than currently recognised."

A new study published in the journal Nature Geoscience led by scientists at University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, found that human-induced environmental changes around Antarctica are contributing to sea level rise in the North Atlantic. The research team analyzed two decades of deep sea oceanographic data collected by observational mooring programs to show that a critical piece of Earth's global system of ocean currents in the North Atlantic has weakened by about 12 percent over the past two decades. "Although these regions are tens of thousands of miles away from each other and abyssal areas are a few miles below the ocean surface, our results reinforce the notion that even the most remote areas of the world's oceans are not untouched by human activity," said the study's lead author Tiago Biló, an assistant scientist at the Rosenstiel School's NOAA Cooperative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies. As part of the NOAA-funded project DeepT (Innovative analysis of deep and abyssal temperatures from bottom-moored instrument), the scientists analyzed data from several observational programs to study changes over time in a cold, dense, and deep water mass located at depths greater than 4,000 meters (2.5 miles) below the ocean surface that flow from the Southern Ocean northward and eventually upwells to shallower depths in other parts of the global ocean such as the North Atlantic. This shrinking deep-ocean branch -- that scientists call the abyssal limb -- is part of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC), a three-dimensional system of ocean currents that act as a "conveyer belt" to distribute heat, nutrients, and carbon dioxide across the world's oceans. This near-bottom branch is comprised of Antarctic bottom water, which forms from the cooling of seawater in the Southern Ocean around Antarctica during winter months. Among the different formation mechanisms of this bottom water, perhaps the most important is the so-called brine rejection, a process that occurs when salty water freezes. As sea ice forms, it releases salt into the surrounding water, increasing its density. This dense water sinks to the ocean floor, creating a cold, dense water layer that spreads northward to fill all three ocean basins -- the Indian, Pacific, and Atlantic oceans. During the 21 st century, the researchers observed that the flow of this Antarctic layer across 16°N latitude in the Atlantic had slowed down, reducing the inflow of cold waters to higher latitudes, and leading to warming of waters in the deep ocean. "The areas affected by this warming spans thousands of miles in the north-south and east-west directions between 4,000- and 6,000-meters of depth," said William Johns, a co-author and professor of ocean sciences at the Rosenstiel School. "As a result, there is a significant increase in the abyssal ocean heat content, contributing to local sea level rise due to the thermal expansion of the water." "Our observational analysis matches what the numerical models have predicted -- human activity could potentially impose circulation changes on the entire ocean," said Biló. "This analysis was only possible because of the decades of collective planning and efforts by multiple oceanographic institutions worldwide."

A new study published in Nature Communications has revealed that the interplay between meandering ocean currents and the ocean floor induces upwelling velocity, transporting warm water to shallower depths. This mechanism contributes substantially to the melting of ice shelves in the Amundsen Sea of West Antarctica. These ice shelves are destabilizing rapidly and contributing to sea level rise. Led by Taewook Park and Yoshihiro Nakayama, an international team of researchers from the Korea Polar Research Institute, Hokkaido University, and Seoul National University employed advanced ocean modeling techniques to investigate the underlying forces behind the rapid melting ice shelves. In a departure from prior assumptions linking ice shelf melting primarily to winds over the Southern Ocean, this study underscores the significant role played by the interactions between meandering ocean currents and the ocean floor in driving the melting process. The Pine Island and Thwaites ice shelves are among the fastest-changing in Antarctica and are of particular interest due to their vulnerability to warming ocean waters. They act as massive barriers restraining the glaciers behind them from flowing into the ocean. However, their rapid melting and potential collapse pose a significant threat to coastal communities worldwide because of the resulting rise in global sea levels. The study focused on the role of a layer of warm water beneath the frigid surface waters, known as the 'modified Circumpolar Deep Water,' in melting these ice shelves from below. "The intensity and trajectory of ocean currents encircling the ice shelves directly govern the influx of warm water, thereby intricately shaping their rate of melting" explains Taewook. This shows the importance of the ocean in understanding and addressing the impacts of climate change. The researchers paid attention to the 'thermocline depth', which is the depth of the interface between warmer deep waters and cooler surface waters. Variations in thermocline depth significantly affect the influx of warm water toward the ice shelves. Until now, it has been believed that intensified westerly winds north of the Amundsen Sea propelled ocean currents along the shelf break, carrying warmer water toward ice shelf cavities. This phenomenon is particularly pronounced during El Niño events. "Our findings challenge conventional wisdom," Nakayama asserts. "Our study underscores that the interplay between meandering ocean currents and the ocean floor generates upwelling velocity, bringing warm water to shallower depths. Subsequently, this warm water reaches the ice-ocean interface, accelerating ice shelf melting." Nakayama concludes, "This internal oceanic process driving ice shelf melting introduces a novel concept. With this in mind, we have to reevaluate winds driving Antarctic ice loss, which can significantly impact future projections."

Japan's dramatic natural coastline, with iconic views of Mount Fuji, wind-blown pines and rocky beaches, has been captured and admired in paintings and prints for hundreds of years. But take a walk by the ocean nowadays and it can be hard to find a stretch that retains its pristine natural seascape. By the early 1990s, a government survey found that around 40% of the coast had been altered with concrete sea walls, filled harbors, stacks of tetrapods and more, adding swaths of gray to the blue-green landscape. Sprawling coastal cities and towns have grown to house most of the population, so protecting homes and businesses from the dangers of tsunamis, typhoon swells and sea-level rise has become an ever-increasing challenge. "Sea walls, dikes, dams and breakwaters, the so-called traditional hard measures, despite being the most popular coastal defenses globally and with proven track records, are facing challenges to keep pace with increasing climate risks," explained Lam Thi Mai Huynh, a doctoral studentfrom the graduate program in sustainability science at the University of Tokyo and lead author of a new study on coastal defenses. "These hard structures are expensive to build and require continuous upgrades and repairs as sea level rises and climatic hazards become stronger. Although they are good at mitigating certain coastal disaster risks, they can also cause significant disruption to coastal communities and have adverse environmental effects. Furthermore, they often significantly alter the seascape and sometimes alienate local communities from nature and the very environment we seek to protect." To better understand the performance and benefits of different hard and nature-based coastal defenses, an international team compared the results of 304 academic studies. Nature-based coastal defenses included: "natural" ecosystems, for example, existing mangroves and coral reefs; "soft" measures, which restore, rehabilitate, reforest or nourish natural ecosystems; and "hybrid" measures that combine both nature-based components and hard structures, such as placing concrete breakwaters in front of mangroves. "By incorporating such natural components, we can create coastal defenses that reduce risk and also offer substantial environmental benefits. We believe that such strategies are very promising in many parts of the world, but they are also not a 'fix-all' solution," said Professor Alexandros Gasparatos from the Institute for Future Initiatives at the University of Tokyo. The researchers analyzed three key aspects of each type of defense: 1. risk reduction (how much the measure could reduce wave height and energy, and influence shoreline change); 2. climate change mitigation (including carbon storage and greenhouse gas emissions for nature-based measures); and 3. cost-effectiveness over a 20-year period. "Our results indicate that among all coastal defense options in lower-risk areas, hybrid measures provide the highest risk reduction. Hybrid measures can harness the advantages of both hard and soft measures. They provide the immediacy of an engineered barrier while largely maintaining the ecological functionality of a permeable vegetated zone," said Huynh. "All nature-based solutions are found to be effective in storing carbon, while both soft and hybrid measures are relatively more cost-effective than traditional hard measures over a 20-year period, though all have positive economic returns." These findings provide strong evidence for integrating and upscaling nature-based components into coastal defenses, but the team advised doing so with caution. "All types of coastal defenses have yet to be adequately tested through paired experiments in circumstances of extreme events and high-risk urgency," warned Gasparatos. "Until there are many more such experiments focusing on this, we must caution against any universal assumptions about the comparative performance of coastal defense options, whether natural, soft or hybrid measures." While acknowledging the limits imposed by the lack of available research on extreme and high-risk situations, Huynh and Gasparatos still believe that this study supports the idea of investing in nature-based solutions for coastal defense in lower-risk areas. Research like this has important implications for policymakers, coastal planners and communities looking to make evidence-based decisions. "I firmly believe that we must think more carefully about the design and function of these barriers in this era of ever-accelerating climate change," said Huynh. "Not only can nature-based solutions contribute to risk reduction and climate mitigation in many areas, but they can also help reconnect people with nature and support biodiversity. Greening our coastlines can create spaces which enhance quality of life, foster community well-being and inspire environmental stewardship."

Along the Atlantic coasts of Europe, many species are exposed to abrupt shifts in habitat. Tides, storms and rapid temperature changes are commonplace for the marine species that live there. With climate change, heatwaves are expected to become more frequent, and researchers wanted to find out how coastal marine species cope with extreme water temperatures. They chose to study the sea anemone species Actinia equina, a species that exhibits individual behaviours. Brave or shy "We call them animal personalities. They are different behavioural life strategies found in the same species. The anemones we studied have two personality traits, bold and shy, and in extreme heat waves the shy anemones do better," says Lynne Sneddon, a zoophysiologist at the University of Gothenburg and co-author of the study published in the Journal of Experimental Biology. Being a shy or bold anemone describes the individual's risk-taking. Both behaviours have advantages that have made them winners in evolution, otherwise they would not exist. A bold anemone reacts more quickly to changes in the environment than a shy anemone does. This means that the bold ones are quicker than the shy ones to open their tentacles to forage after a change. The bold anemones can trap more of the nutrients in the water, and this gives them a competitive advantage. On the other hand, they become more vulnerable in extreme conditions, such as heat waves. The researchers' study shows that being a shy individual is a better survival strategy when the water is extremely hot. "We measured the metabolism of the anemones and could see that when the water temperature was high, the metabolism of the bold anemones skyrocketed. This meant that they had to increase their nutrient intake so much that they risked dying. The shy anemones' metabolism increased less, so they were better able to cope with the heat stress," says Lynne Sneddon. Rapid warming at low tide In coasts with large tidal differences, water collects in "rock pools" that warm up quickly on the ebb tide before the next flood washes in with colder seawater. Anemones living in these pools are therefore particularly vulnerable to large temperature differences. "Heat waves will become more common in the future and cold-blooded animals may find it difficult to cope. We studied anemones, but we have reason to believe that the phenomenon applies to other species as well. If the animals can't cope, there will be a disruption in the ecosystems and this could have implications for the whole food web," says Lynne Sneddon.

To counteract ongoing climate change, it is important to understand how CO 2 emissions are distributed. And which exchange processes between the atmosphere, ocean and land regulate the distribution. Methodological developments in recent years have allowed for a more flexible inclusion of physical and biogeochemical processes in climate models and for capturing individual regions with higher resolution. Researchers from the Cluster of Excellence "Climate, Climatic Change, and Society" (CLICCS) have taken advantage of this. In collaboration between Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon, Universität Hamburg, Max Planck Institute for Meteorology and University of Bern, they have developed a new type of ocean model that can efficiently simulate the transport, storage and turnover of carbon in the global coastal ocean for the first time: ICON-Coast. More realistic representation In computational climate science, land and ocean, the Earth's two major carbon reservoirs, have so far been considered separately. The transport of carbon into the coastal seas, for example via river inputs, coastal erosion and tidal flats, has been ignored. Coast-specific processes could only be considered in a limited and spatially coarse manner because climate models were developed for global scales. Due to the more realistic representation and higher resolution in the transition zone between land and ocean used in ICON-Coast, the model offers new possibilities to explore the effects of climate change on coastal areas and marine ecosystems, such as risks from heat waves, storms, or global sea level rise. The coastal ocean is small but significant It is known from observations that the increase in atmospheric CO 2 concentration enhances the uptake of CO 2 into the ocean, thereby significantly mitigating climate change. Simulations with ICON-Coast now shed light on the causes and enable understanding of the function of coastal and marginal seas in the Earth's climate dynamics: "Our analyses show that intense plankton growth is the key to enhanced CO 2 uptake in the coastal ocean and that this uptake is higher than in the open ocean. This is due to climate-induced changes in the circulation and increasing nutrient inputs from rivers," says Dr Moritz Mathis, who led the study. The researchers also expect that the intensity difference between coastal seas and the open ocean will continue to strengthen further with ongoing CO 2 emissions. All the more important: "Coastal management strategies that disturb biological production could weaken the ocean's CO 2 uptake and make climate protection more difficult," emphasizes Mathis. "With the new model, we can also test approaches to CO 2 avoidance such as offshore wind energy for their effectiveness and undesirable side effects."

However, some other natural processes have been overlooked. Farshid Vahedifard, professor and Louis Berger Chair in civil and environmental engineering, points to an important one that lies directly beneath our feet and covers most of our planet above water. In a study published in Environmental Research Letters , Vahedifard notes that soil stores 80 percent of carbon on Earth, and with increasing cycles and severity of droughts in several regions, that crucial reservoir is cracking and breaking down, releasing even more carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. In fact, it may be creating an amplified feedback loop that could accelerate climate change well beyond current predictions. "This process has not been sufficiently evaluated in the existing literature or incorporated into models," said Vahedifard. "If we don't consider the interplay of drought, soil desiccation cracking, and CO 2 emissions, that could result in significant inaccuracies when modeling and predicting climate change. There are other repercussions as well. Poorer soil health can lead to reduced photosynthesis and lower carbon dioxide uptake, and it can compromise the structural integrity of earthen dams that protect against floods." There are also other amplifying feedback loops that may not have been fully accounted for in climate change models, he said. These include melting of sea ice and exposure of darker ocean surfaces that absorb more heat from the sun. The increase of wildfires due to warm, dry conditions releases a lot of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, which in turn creates hotter, drier weather more conducive to fires. Another amplified feedback loop is the thawing of Arctic and sub-Arctic permafrost, which also releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and raises climate temperature, leading to more melted permafrost. But soil changes caused by drought could be as significant, if not more significant, than any of those factors. Drought, manifested by long periods of low soil moisture content and high temperature, leads to cracking in fine-grained soils, sometimes extending meters below the surface. The cracks result in more exposure to the air, increased microbial activity and breakdown of organic matter, released carbon dioxide, and loss of nutrients and ability to support plant growth, reducing carbon dioxide sequestering. The deep cracks expose much older reserves of carbon that had previously been stable and protected. The permeation of air into the soil accelerates the release of not only carbon dioxide from organic matter but also other greenhouse gases like nitrous oxide. Small animals like earthworms and millipedes that help turn the soil over are also affected by the reduced moisture and increased air exposure, being less able to play active roles in nutrient cycling and soil structure maintenance. That, in turn, increases the likelihood of soil cracking and aeration. "The amplifying effect of soil carbon feedback loops and its interactions with other loops could carry us across tipping points and lead to even more severe and permanent shifts in climate," said Vahedifard. He noted that government agencies and policymakers need to promote sustainable land use, "which can include adoption of precision irrigation techniques and water conservation practices, and use of drought tolerant crops," he said. "Organic fertilizers and compost can enhance soil organic matter content and improve soil water-holding capacity. Of course, this can only help if it's part of a comprehensive effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from all human activity."

The researchers looked at threatened spring-run Chinook salmon in tributaries of the Sacramento River. It found that restored sites that produce lots of fish may be especially vulnerable to changes such as drought. Such sites should be coupled with other varying sites that support the salmon population in diverse ways. "The fish need all the different opportunities," said Flora Cordoleani, a NOAA Fisheries and University of California Santa Cruz researcher who led the research published this week in Ecosphere . "Fish with one life history that favors certain habitat are not going to save the population in the long term. We need diverse habitats to support diverse life histories that help provide resilience." Life history refers to salmon traits such as their juvenile migration timing, growth rates, and food preferences. For instance, some juvenile salmon migrate to the ocean in their first year, while others may spend the year growing in freshwater first. That timing may benefit them in some years, but leave them more vulnerable in others, such as during drought. Spring Chinook salmon were once found across the state and formed the backbone of California's commercial salmon fishery. They are now greatly diminished and survive in only a few key watersheds with worsening trends in numbers. State and federal biologists last fall collected a few remaining spring-run Chinook salmon to begin a captive broodstock that will safeguard the genetic heritage of the species. Habitat Mix Benefits Fish Fish benefit most when they have access to a mosaic of interconnecting habitat from streamside vegetation to open floodplains, the research found. Young salmon may grow rapidly when wet years inundate floodplains and produce plentiful food, "but that happens pretty rarely," Cordoleani said. "The key is for the fish to have access to all those habitats, so if something happens to one of them, the fish don't all disappear." The new research goes beyond earlier studies showing that later-migrating fish had better survival rates. It shows how that played out on the landscape of three creeks that feed the Sacramento River, one of the biggest salmon-producing rivers on the West Coast. Cordoleani and her team examined Butte Creek, the focus of extensive restoration that produced a large increase in fish numbers that had access to the floodplain. They examined salmon otoliths -- small ear bones -- that record clues about each fish's life history. They found few later-migrating fish, which made the fish there more vulnerable to sharp declines during drought years that may become more common with climate change. Two other nearby streams, Mill and Deer Creek, offered different conditions and hosted more fish that migrated later as yearlings (juveniles oversummering in freshwater). While they did not see the big increases in fish abundance that Butte Creek did, their salmon better survived droughts. Combining the three sites that complement each other increases the resilience of the Central Valley spring run stock complex -- the term for all the individual populations combined. "The sum of the parts is much greater, because they are doing different things and supporting the fish in different ways," said Rachel Johnson, the senior author of the research and scientist at NOAA Fisheries' Southwest Fisheries Science Center. "Some of those qualities may turn out to be more or less important as the climate changes." But relying on these three creeks is not enough. "Spring-run Chinook are already playing the climate stock market with only a few stocks in their portfolio," Johnson said. They were once found in every major watershed. She said a lesson of the research is that more habitat options help fish survive a volatile climate by providing more opportunities to survive and thrive. Providing that array of options requires restoring diverse habitat areas that complement each other at the landscape scale and returning salmon to historical habitats that had long vanished. Cordoleani and her team hope that this research encourages restoration planners to implement projects that create a mosaic of different habitats across watersheds that support diverse fish survival strategies. These actions will also balance each other to help stabilize numbers in the long term.

For a paper published recently in Geophysical Research Letters , the UCI-led team used radar interferometry data from several European satellite missions to map the tidal motion of Petermann Glacier and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's general calculation model to estimate the impact of climate change in a complex environment involving ice, seawater and land, all of which are under the influence of tides and climate change-driven temperature boosts. "Satellite data revealed that the glacier shifts by several kilometers -- or thousands of feet -- as tides change," said lead author Ratnakar Gadi, UCI Ph.D. candidate in Earth system science. "By factoring this migration into the MIT numerical ocean model, we were able to estimate roughly 140 meters [460 feet] of thinning of the ice between 2000 and 2020. On average, the melt rate has increased from about 3 meters per year in the 1990s to 10 meters per year in the 2020s." Senior co-author Eric Rignot, UCI professor of Earth system science, said that this and other studies conducted by his team in recent years have caused a fundamental shift in polar ice researchers' thinking about ocean and glacier interactions. "For a long time, we thought of the transition boundary between ice and ocean to be sharp, but it's not, and in fact it diffuses over a very wide zone, the 'grounding zone,' which is several kilometers wide," said Rignot, who is also a senior research scientist at NASA JPL. "Seawater rises and falls with changes in oceanic tides in that zone and melts grounded ice from below vigorously." Gadi said the model predicted that melt rates will be highest near the mouth of the grounding zone cavity and greater than anywhere else in the ice shelf cavity. Warmer water and greater seawater intrusion beneath the ice explains the observed thinning along Petermann's central flowline. According to the study, the elongated shape of the grounding zone cavity is a major contributor to accelerated ice melting. In a run of the numerical model taking into account just warmer ocean temperature, the team found thinning of about 40 meters. In a second modeling exercise, an increase in the grounding zone cavity from 2 to 6 kilometers was included, and in that case, ice thinning grew to 140 meters. "These modeling results conclude that changes in grounding zone lengths increase melt more significantly than warmer ocean temperatures alone," Gadi said. The researchers noted that grounding zone ice melt reduces the resistance glaciers experience when flowing toward the sea, speeding their retreat. The researchers said this is a key factor used in projecting the severity of future sea level rise. "The results published in this paper have major implications for ice sheet modeling and projections of sea level rise," Rignot said. "Earlier numerical studies indicated that including melt in the grounding zone would double the projections of glacier mass loss. The modeling work in this study confirms these fears. Glaciers melt much faster in the ocean than assumed previously." Joining Rignot and Gadi on this project was Dimitris Menemenlis, NASA JPL research scientist. The work was conducted under a grant by NASA's Cryospheric Sciences Program.

Published in Nature , the study combines satellite-obtained measurements of sinking land, also known as subsidence, with sea-level rise projections and tide charts to provide a new comprehensive look at the potential for flooding in a combined 32 cities along the Atlantic, Pacific, and Gulf coasts. The study projects that in the next three decades as many as 500,000 people could be affected as well as a potential 1 in 35 privately owned properties damaged by flooding. The study also highlights the racial and socioeconomic demographics of those potentially affected. "One of the challenges we have with communicating the issue of sea-level rise and land subsidence broadly is it often seems like a long-term problem, like something whose impacts will only manifest at the end of the century, which many people may not care about," said lead author Leonard Ohenhen, a graduate student working with Associate Professor Manoochehr Shirzaei at Virginia Tech's Earth Observation and Innovation Lab. "What we've done here is focused the picture on the short term, just 26 years from now." Other increases compared to current estimates include: "The whole purpose of this paper is to provide data to support decisions," Shirzaei said. "Every city, every county has a flood resiliency plan in place. They are required by law to create that. But it's likely nobody has received the entire picture until this study, which creates probably the first comprehensive picture of what's happen in the not-too-distant future." Collaborators on the study include: "This study demonstrates that we can now measure vertical land motion at a sufficient scale to create a useful climate service that supports planning and management decisions on flooding," said Nicholls, a professor of climate adaptation. "This approach has the potential to be applied in any city around the world, really supporting adaptation." Using highly accurate data points measured by space-based radar satellites, Shirzaei and his research team have built some of the world's first high-resolution depictions of the sinking land along the coast of the entire United States. Their work has previously revealed regions of the Atlantic coast to be sinking by as much as 5 millimeters per year. This study revealed that 24 of the 32 coastal cities are currently sinking more than 2 millimeters per year and half of those cities have areas sinking more than global seas are rising. These numbers might seem small, but when combined with sea-level rise over time, it adds up to quite a significant shift, according to Ohenhen. "The analogy I have found that is really helpful in helping people understand this change is to think about a sinking boat," he said. "Imagine you are in that boat with a steady leak, slowly causing the boat to sink. That leak symbolizes sea-level rise or broadly flooding. What would happen if it also starts raining? Even a minor rainfall or drizzle would cause the boat to sink more quickly than you thought it would. That's what land subsidence does -- even imperceptible millimeter land subsidence exacerbates existing coastal hazards." Along with the new flood projections, the study also revealed the 32 cities have a combined 131 flood control structures, such as levees, berms, or dikes, but that 50 percent of those are located on the California coast. Only three of the 11 Atlantic coast cities studied maintain levees or floodwalls. "When we looked at it across the board, we found that there is a general unappreciation for flood protection, particularly on the Atlantic coast," Ohenhen said. "And even the levees there often protect less than 10 percent of the city, compared to other cities on the Pacific or Gulf coasts where up to 70 percent is protected." Another first in the study is the consideration of racial and socioeconomic demographics related to the potentially affected areas. In some cities examined, particularly those along the Gulf Coast, the potential increased exposure fell disproportionately on racial minorities. In other cities, the properties facing increased exposure were found to generally be of lesser value than the median property value of the area. And in a few cities, New Orleans and Port Arthur, Texas, particularly, these two demographics intersect, showing the areas with greatest potential risk to be disproportionately occupied by people of color who are also at an economic disadvantage when compared to the city as a whole. "That was the most surprising part of the study," Ohenhen said. "We found that there is racial and economic inequality in those areas in that there was an overrepresentation of historically marginalized groups potentially impacted as well as properties with significantly lower value than the rest of the cities. It really multiplies the potential impact to those areas and their abilities to recover from significant flooding." Shirzaei said he believes the study as a whole not only provides the clearest picture of potential flooding to date, but also should serve as a call to action for policymakers of those areas. "Very often, we hear, 'Oh, we didn't know about land subsidence' or, 'We didn't know about that other factor,' but this study will take away those excuses from everybody," Shirzaei said.

A team of scientists led by the University of Leeds analysed historical data from river gauging stations across the globe and found that 21% of them showed significant alterations in the seasonal rise and fall in water levels. The study used data-based reconstructions and state-of-the-art simulations to show that river flow is now far less likely to vary with the seasons in latitudes above 50°N than previously, and that this could be directly linked to changes to the climate caused by human activity. Until now, evidence suggesting that climate change has had an impact on river flow seasonality has been limited to local studies or has failed to consider the impact of climate change brought about by humans explicitly. In this study the team used monthly average river flow measurements from 10,120 gauging stations from 1965 to 2014. For the first time ever, they were able to exclude direct human interventions such as reservoir management or water extraction, to show that widespread reduction in river flow seasonality was driven by climate change. The results of the research, which was funded by the University of Leeds and the Southern University of Science and Technology in China are published today (29 February) in the journal Science . Lead author, Hong Wang, a PhD researcher at the University of Leeds and the Southern University of Science and Technology in China, said: "Our research shows that rising air temperatures are fundamentally altering the natural patterns of river flow. "The concerning aspect of this change is the observed weakening of river flow seasonality, and that this is as a direct consequence of historical human-induced emissions. This signals a sustained and considerable diminishment of river flow seasonality if air temperatures continue to rise." Human impact on river flow Human activities are altering river flow patterns worldwide, both directly through flow regulations such as reservoirs, and indirectly through land use change and the impacts of climate change on air temperature, precipitation, soil moisture, and snowmelt. Over two-thirds of the world's rivers have already been altered by humans even without considering the indirect impacts of increases in greenhouse gases and aerosols. River flow seasonality plays a critical role in the predicted cycle of floods and droughts. A weakening of these peaks and troughs can threaten water security and freshwater biodiversity. For example, a substantial portion of the early meltwater from snowpack depletion may quickly flow into oceans and therefore not be available for human use. Weakening river flow seasonality -- for example due to a reduction in spring and early summer river levels in snowmelt regions -- can also have an impact downstream on riverbank vegetation and organisms living in the river itself. Gauging the seasonal flow In northern North America, the researchers found that 40% of the 119 stations observed showed a significant decrease in river flow seasonality. Similar results were also observed in sSouthern Siberia with 32% of stations showing a significant decrease. There was a comparable pattern in Europe, with 19% of the river gauging stations experiencing a significant decrease -- mainly in northern Europe, western Russia and the European Alps. In addition, regions in the contiguous United States (the lower 48 states in North America, including the District of Columbia) showed predominantly decreasing trends of river flow seasonality overall, except for rivers in the Rocky Mountains and Florida. In central North America, the research showed significant decreasing river flow seasonality trends in 18% of the stations. By contrast, the researchers found a significant increase in river flow seasonality in 25% of the gauging stations in southeast Brazil, showing that changes to the water cycle are having a different impact in some parts of the world. Dr Megan Klaar, an Associate Professor in the University of Leeds School of Geography and a member of ater@eeds, co-authored the research. She said: "The highs and lows of river flow during the different seasons provide vital cues for the species living in the water. "For example, a lot of fish use particular increases in the water as a cue to run to their breeding areas upstream or towards the sea. If they don't have those cues, they won't be able to spawn." The research concludes that there is a need to accelerate climate adaptation efforts to safeguard freshwater ecosystems by managing flows to try to recreate some of the natural systems and processes that are being lost. Professor Joseph Holden, the Director of ater@eeds and who supervised Hong Wang's research, added: "A lot of concern is based upon what climate change will do in the future but our research signals that it's happening now and that increases in air temperature are driving huge changes in river flow. "We should be very concerned about what the future holds given accelerating climate change and begin to think about mitigation strategies and adaptation planning to alleviate the future weakening of seasonal river flow, particularly in locations such as western Russia, Scandinavia, and Canada."

Collected using a novel approach, research from the University of Maine has unearthed new information to help scientists better understand circulation patterns of ocean water around glaciers. A group of pioneers in glacial research attached GPS devices to icebergs and used their mobility to understand fjord circulation, which can ultimately enhance the accuracy of climate models. In the summers of 2014 and 2019, the GPS devices tracked hourly changes in the position of 13 icebergs as they passed through Greenland's Ilulissat Icefjord toward the ocean. Starting as research during her time at the University of Oregon, UMaine assistant professor of geomatics Kristin Schild collected the fjord data with a colleague from UO, earth sciences professor and oceanographer David Sutherland. In 2020, an undergraduate student, Sydney Baratta, used these datasets as the focus of her senior capstone project. Continuing the research into her graduate studies, Baratta processed and analyzed her findings and recently published the results in the Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans. Study results showed circulation in the primary fjord is greatly affected by freshwater flow from connecting tributary fjords, which is critically important to consider in circulation models. Such models can range from studying ocean currents to predicting the speed at which sea level could rise. "Being able to utilize the many icebergs that are in this fjord is really unique to the study," said Baratta. Ilulissat Icefjord is home to Sermeq Kujalleq, one of the fastest and most active glaciers in the world. This makes the fjord a good, but challenging location to understand glaciers' interaction with the ocean and predict how the icy giants respond to ocean warming. "Think about ice cubes in a glass of water. They float," said Baratta. "But if it's in a fjord, under the influence of other forces like wind and the currents, the icebergs move around. What we wanted to do was put GPS trackers on those icebergs to infer what the circulation in the fjord is and see how that is influenced by the environment." Carlos Moffat, who researches glacier-ocean interactions and polar oceanography at the University of Delaware, said equipment stationed in fjords is commonly crushed by all the movement. How Schild collected these datasets, he said, was innovative. Instead of viewing the icebergs as an obstacle, she used them as a tool to carry and protect the equipment. "It's a situation where the thing you're interested in is destroying your gear," said Moffat. "So what they've done in this study is basically flip the script." Impact beyond the Arctic Greenland, where Ilulissat Icefjord is located, and Antarctica have the largest fresh water reservoirs of ice in the world. How quickly the ice sheets melt contribute to sea level rise worldwide. In Greenland and Antarctica, glaciers "dip their toes" in ocean water, Moffat said, which can allow ocean warming to accelerate how quickly the ice melts or breaks into icebergs. Lauren Ross, UMaine associate professor of hydraulics and water resources engineering, said Baratta, Schild and Sutherland's findings will be useful for a range of research relating to fjord circulation, including her area of expertise -- the transport of material in water. She recently studied how freshwater flowing into a fjord negatively impacted the growth of a harmful microscopic algae. Unlike in Greenland, more freshwater helped the economy and ecosystems surrounding the fjord. "In order to be as accurate as possible, we have to have the most accurate data to feed into the models," said Ross. "I think it's going to become more and more important as the climate warms." Similar to Ross' reflection, Schild said recognizing that changes are happening in the environment is the starting point. Scientists are now working to fill gaps in research to represent the changing environment and create better predictive models. "Glaciers have reshaped global climate and ecosystems for millions of years," said UMaine President Joan Ferrini-Mundy. "Novel research from our world-renowned climate scientists provides more insight into how they interact with their surrounding environments and plays a vital role in predicting our climate future." Data processing and analysis was supported by grants from the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and NASA's Early Career Investigator Program, which focuses on the use of space-based remote sensing and model integration to benefit humanity. While the ever-altering Greenland Ice Sheet has dramatic local impact, it is the top of a slippery slope slanted toward changes worldwide. What happens in the frozen fjords 2,000 miles to the north of Maine affects New England's seafood cuisine and has a role in the increasingly devastating storms along the coast. "Everything is interconnected," said Baratta. "Changes happening in the Arctic can have trickle-down effects that impact what we see in Maine."

Oceans, especially the deep oceans, absorb and lose heat more slowly than the atmosphere, so an intervention that cools the air would not be able to cool the deep ocean on the same timescale, the authors found. Stratospheric aerosol injection is a commonly discussed geoengineering concept based on the idea that adding particles to the stratosphere could help cool the surface of the planet by reflecting sunlight back into space. This could help stabilize the planet if warming exceeds the 1.5 degree Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) cap set by the Paris Climate Agreement, which the planet is on track to exceed under current emission rates. (Global temperatures surpassed that threshold for several months in 2023 due to a combination of factors in addition to climate change, such as El Niño.) But whether the injections would work is still heavily debated. Previous research hints that a steady trickle of aerosol injections would help cool the surface of the planet. But the new study suggests that while an abrupt aerosol injection later this century could provide some ocean cooling, it wouldn't be enough to nudge "stubborn" ocean patterns such as Atlantic meridional overturning circulation, which some research finds is already weakening. In that case, preexisting problems resulting from a warmed deep ocean, such as altered weather patterns, regional sea level rise and weakened currents, would remain in place even as the atmosphere and surface ocean cooled. "The big picture result is that we believe we can control the surface temperature of the Earth, but other components of the climate system will not be so fast to respond," said Daniel Pflüger, a physical oceanographer at Utrecht University who led the study. "We need to bring down emissions as fast as possible. We're only talking about geoengineering because the political will for emission mitigation is lacking." The study was published in Geophysical Research Letters , AGU's journal for high-impact, short-format reports with immediate implications spanning all Earth and space sciences. Warm planet, wild swings Scientists know the surface of the planet can cool when large volumes of particles are added to the atmosphere because of events such as volcanic eruptions, which naturally emit gases and fine particles. For instance, in 1815, an eruption at Mt. Tambora in Indonesia launched so much material into the air that it cooled the planet the following year. Aerosol injection is based on a similar principle whereby the atmosphere is made more reflective to send incoming solar radiation back into space, cooling the planet. Because of this, Pflüger wanted to test how the atmosphere, shallow ocean, and deep ocean would respond to a steady trickle of aerosol injections over decades as opposed to a big, abrupt injection beginning later in the century. Would such an emergency measure be able to reverse ocean changes? Pflüger and his colleagues simulated two aerosol injection scenarios, both with high carbon emissions. In one scenario, people started slowly adding particles into the atmosphere in 2020. In the other, beginning in 2080, people inject a large initial quantity of aerosols to bring the amount of warming back to 1.5 degrees Celsius, and then continue to add enough aerosols to maintain that level of cooling. The team found that in the 2020 scenario, gradual stratospheric aerosol injections maintain ocean temperatures, structure and circulation patterns roughly similar to today. In the 2080 scenario, the abrupt aerosol injection cooled the Earth's surface, including the top 100 meters (330 feet) of the ocean, to 1.5 degrees Celsius above the preindustrial average in about 10 years. But the deep oceans remained warmer than average, and critical ocean circulation patterns remained altered. The intervention was not entirely successful. The study shows that aerosol injection "might be able to slow down or prevent climate tipping points from happening in the first place," said Daniele Visioni, a climate scientist at Cornell University who was not involved in the research. But aerosol injection "cannot magically restore things." "We cannot kick the can down the road forever," he said. The extreme climate situations modeled here are neither desirable nor likely, Pflüger said. But they provide a good baseline for understanding how Earth systems react to aerosol injections. Ultimately, geoengineering can be useful -- but it cannot be the whole solution, he said. Relying on geoengineering is "in a way, madness," Pflüger said. "But the situation is already quite mad."

To better understand how African great apes will be affected by climate change, researchers investigated past and future climate for 363 sites across Africa. They estimated temperature and rainfall at each site between 1981 and 2010. Using two climate change scenarios, they projected how frequently apes would be exposed to climate change impacts in the near future (2021 -- 2050) and the long term (2071 -- 2099). They estimated the likelihood of extreme events that could impact apes directly or indirectly, such as droughts, flooding, wildfires, and crop failure. Between 2007 and 2016, almost half of the sites had experienced higher than average temperatures, and eastern chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii) experienced the most extreme temperatures. Under both climate scenarios, temperatures were projected to increase at all sites, and almost all sites will be affected by frequent wildfires and crop failures in the near future. Under a scenario where mitigations limit warming to 2°C above pre-industrial levels, 84% of sites were exposed to frequent heatwaves and 78% of sites to infrequent flooding in the next 30 years. Under an alternative scenario where global temperatures rise 3°C, the number of affected sites and the frequency of events was higher. The study is the first to show that African apes are already experiencing the effects of climate change, and that extreme events are likely to become more frequent in the near future. Conservation action plans should aim to increase the resilience of ape populations to climate change, the authors say. The authors add: "Our study indicates an urgent need to incorporate adaptation to climate change impacts into conservation planning for African great apes."

According to a representative survey of 38,616 high school students from 22 public school districts in 14 U.S. states, the quarter of those adolescents who had experienced the highest number of days in a climate disaster within the past two years and the past five years -- such as hurricanes, floods, tornadoes, droughts, and wildfire -- had 20% higher odds of developing mental distress than their peers who experienced few or no disaster events. The paper is the first large scale research looking at mental health of adolescents following multiple disaster events -- including the timing, frequency, and duration of the events -- spanning 83 federally declared climate disasters occurring within 10 years before the survey was completed. The findings, using May 2019 data on sadness/hopelessness and short sleep from the U.S. Youth Risk Behavior Survey and disaster data from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, were published this month in the journal Preventive Medicine Reports . "We know that climate change has and will have catastrophic impacts across the globe," said lead author Amy Auchincloss, PhD, an associate professor of epidemiology in the Dornsife School of Public Health. "But we were alarmed to find that climate related disasters already were affecting so many teens in the U.S. For example, within the past 2 years, many school districts in our study were subject to climate disasters for over 20 days." Respondents reported mental health distress by responding affirmatively to persistent feelings of sadness or hopelessness and short sleep duration, two factors that previous studies strongly link to mental health disorders among adolescents. The group controlled for other factors that may influence mental health, such as age, race, gender, experience of bullying, concerns about school safety and household income. A positive, but not statistically significant, link between experiencing climate disasters and mental distress was also found when spanning ten years before the U.S. Youth Risk Survey. "We found the strongest effects on mental distress in the 2 years immediately following a climate disaster -- with the effect gradually weakening 5 to 10 years after the disaster," said co-author Josiah Kephart, PhD, an assistant professor in the Dornsife School of Public Health. As the results cannot prove causation, the authors say they would like to see more studies into the range of effects of climate change on youth and methods to improve preparing for potential worsening mental health among this population. Already, roughly half of adolescents have experienced a mental health disorder in their childhood or teen years, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "Resources for the youth mental health crisis already have difficulty meeting demand and demand will increase as disasters increase," said co-author Esther Chernak, MD, a clinical professor and director of the Center for Public Health Readiness and Communication at Dornsife School of Public Health. "The current study is evidence that clinicians, policymakers, parents, and many others with a stake in youth mental health can point to when advocating for increasing adolescent-specific mental health resources -- particularly in lower-income communities who will be hit hardest by disasters." Drexel's Dornsife School of Public Health is home to significant ongoing work addressing health and climate change. Among other projects, the school's Urban Health Collaborative recently received National Institutes of Health funding to support establishment of the Drexel Climate Change and Urban Health Research Center (CCUH), which with foster research on the effects of climate change on health across the Americas. The Urban Health in Latin America Project (SALURBAL-Climate), of which Dornsife School of Public Health is an institutional partner, funds research on climate change's links to health and health inequity impacts across Latin America using data on as any as 400 cities in 11 countries. Additional work at the school, in collaboration with the World Resources Institute (WRI), WRI Brasil, SALURBAL, and WRI Mexico, seeks to deepen our understanding of the relationship between neighborhood-scale heat mortality and neighborhood social characteristics in two Brazilian cities; the findings of which aim to inform public policy. In addition to Auchincloss, additional authors on the study includes Dominic A. Ruggiero, and Meghan T. Donnelly, who were graduate students at Drexel at the time of this work.

The study analysed how green spaces and waterways cool down cities and towns. Professor Prashant Kumar, Director of Surrey's Global Centre for Clean Air Research (GCARE), said: "We have known for some time that green spaces and water can cool cities down. However, this study provides us the most comprehensive picture yet. What's more -- we can explain why. From trees providing shade, to evaporating water cooling the air." They found that while success depends heavily on local factors -- there were some general patterns. Among the key findings, the following green spaces and waterways cooled the air considerably: Botanical gardens: -5°C avg (variation: -2.2°C to -10°C) Wetlands: -4.7°C avg (variation: -1.2°C to -12°C) Rain garden: -4.5°C avg (variation: -1.3°C to -7°C) Green walls: -4.1°C avg (variation: -0.1°C to -18°C) Street trees: -3.8°C avg (variation: -0.5°C to -12°C) City farm: -3.5°C avg (variation -3°C to -3.9°C) Parks: -3.2°C avg (variation -0.8°C to -10°C) Reservoirs -2.9°C avg (variation -1.8°C to 5°C) Playgrounds: -2.9°C avg (variation: -2.8°C to -3°C) Up to a point, the bigger the park -- the bigger the cooling effect. Cities can unlock greater benefits by connecting green spaces into 'green corridors'. Greening projects can also remove carbon emissions and even help prevent flooding. Professor Kumar said: "This will help town planners around the world confront the challenges of global heating. By implementing just some of the measures we describe, cities can become more resilient, and their citizens can be healthier and happier too." However -- the team also found areas of the globe which were vulnerable to heat -- but had not researched the best way to use green spaces to cool down. Maria de Fatima Andrade, Professor at the Atmospheric Sciences Department at the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil, said: "Our paper confirms just how many ways there are to keep cool. But it also reveals how much work is left to do. Institutions around the world need to invest in the right research -- because what's very clear from our study is that there is no one-size-fits-all solution. It depends on what works for your community." The study is published in the journal, The Innovation . The study demonstrates the University of Surrey's contribution towards the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals, especially Goal 11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities) and Goal 13 (Climate Action).

Scientists are usually forced to rely on computer models to project the long-term effects of rising seas. But an unexpected set of circumstances enabled a real-world experiment along the Gulf Coast. An extensive network of nearly 400 monitoring sites was established along the Louisiana coast after hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Then the rate of sea-level rise in the region surged to more than 10 millimeters (half an inch) per year -- at least three times the global average. That exposed the region to the kind of ocean rise not expected until around 2070. The accelerated rise created a unique opportunity to determine whether the marshes can survive that pace of coastal flooding. "It is the dream of every field researcher who does experiments -- we can basically travel 50 years into the future to get a peek at what's in store," said Torbjörn Törnqvist, Vokes Geology Professor in the Tulane Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences. The researchers used new techniques developed by European scientists to measure sea-level rise right off the coast with satellite data, something that was previously not available. The team then compared the rate of water-level rise at each monitoring site with the rate of wetland elevation change determined by other instruments and found that almost 90% of the sites were in deficit. "To our knowledge, this is the first time that a climate impact experiment has been carried out over a region this large, based on hundreds of monitoring stations that have collected data for about 15 years," said Guandong Li, a PhD candidate in Earth and Environmental Sciences at Tulane who led the study. "This has also allowed us to study the climate impact on a heavily human-influenced landscape, rather than a more resilient pristine ecosystem." Li was investigating the role of land subsidence in coastal Louisiana when a team led by Sönke Dangendorf, the David and Jane Flowerree Professor in Tulane's Department of River-Coastal Science and Engineering, demonstrated the unprecedented rates of sea-level rise along the Gulf and Southeast U.S. coasts since 2010. "Guandong immediately dropped everything he was working on to take advantage of this unique opportunity," Törnqvist said. "He set out to answer the key question of whether coastal marshes can keep up with this rate of sea-level rise, as some earlier modeling studies had suggested they can." If the current climate scenario persists, the rate of sea-level rise by 2070 is expected to be about 7 millimeters (one quarter inch) per year. The study projects that approximately 75% of wetland sites will be in deficit by that time, potentially resulting in a rate of wetland loss much higher than what has already occurred in the past century. However, the researchers emphasize that there is hope for a more favorable outcome if immediate action is taken. By meeting the targets set by the Paris Agreement and reducing carbon emissions, it is possible to shift to a more sustainable climate trajectory that would reduce the rate of wetland loss. The study was funded by the U.S. Department of the Treasury through Louisiana's Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority's Center of Excellence Research Grants Program (RESTORE Act).

Natural habitats flooded by the tide form ecosystems that captures large amounts of carbon, which can help to mitigate climate change. Carbon dioxide is stored in the biomass and in the muddy soils. Therefore, several governments have launched blue carbon market initiatives to encourage landowners to restore and preserve mangrove and saltmarsh ecosystems, similar to the rainforest. Large flow of bicarbonate A new research report from the University of Gothenburg shows that the climate mitigation effect is even better than previously thought. "We have uncovered additional stored carbon in mangrove forests and salt marshes. Our new findings show that much of the carbon is exported to the ocean bound as bicarbonate as the tide recedes and remains dissolved in the ocean for thousands of years. Bicarbonate stabilises the pH and can reduce ocean acidification. This contribution has previously been overlooked," says Gloria Reithmaier, a researcher in marine chemistry at the University of Gothenburg. Bicarbonate is harmless and is used in baking powder, among other things. In the oceans, carbonate and bicarbonate are used to build shells and coral skeletons. Measured all over the world Reithmaier and her colleagues enlisted the help of scientists from 12 different countries to analyse intertidal carbon transport in 45 mangrove swamps and 16 salt marshes around the world. When they accounted for bicarbonate export from the ecosystems to the ocean, the size of the carbon trap in these ecosystems doubled. "Our results showed that bicarbonate exports were equal to, or even surpassed, the amount of carbon stored in the soil. Therefore, previous estimates of these blue carbon sources have underestimated the potential of mangroves and saltmarshes to mitigate climate change," says Gloria Reithmaier, adding: "Our results show that blue carbon ecosystems are more effective in mitigating climate change than previously thought. It is now even more important to protect and restore mangrove and salt marsh ecosystems."

This call is emphasized by UBC researchers in a peer-reviewed article published recently in the journal Science of the Total Environment . Dr. Younes Alila, a hydrologist and professor in the faculty of forestry, and his graduate student Henry Pham synthesized decades of hydrology studies and found that many "severely and consistently underestimated" the impact of forest cover on flood risk. As a consequence, it led to forest management policies and practices that were either unsound or poorly informed. Cause and effect For more than a century, Dr. Alila explained, scientists have clung to a "deterministic" analysis. To use a strategic board game analogy, this is like looking at each move in isolation and thinking, "If I move here, then I should win." It fails to account for the roll of the dice, the cards you draw, and what your opponents might do -- all of which can change the game. When it comes to understanding how logging might increase flood risk, a deterministic approach would look at the logging alone and try to figure out its direct effect. But the risk of flooding is influenced by many things, such as how much snow is on the ground, whether it's melting or not, how much rain is falling, and the characteristics of the landscape itself. These factors interact over time in complex ways. Taking them all into account is called a "probabilistic" approach and provides a better overall picture of flood risk. It's like a savvy board game player considering all the game's variables instead of just one. "The probabilistic approach is already well established in other disciplines such as climate change science. It is the most accurate method for evaluating the effects of deforestation on floods," said Henry Pham, a student in UBC's master of science in forestry program. Forests can lower flood risk Dr. Alila says the probabilistic framework is designed to understand and predict, for instance, how much of the 2021 Fraser Valley floods could be attributed to climate change, land use change or logging. The approach also can be extended to investigate the causes of flood risk in other cities and regions. He added: "In B.C. alone, the flood risk is escalating as we continue to lose forest cover due to ongoing large-scale logging and wildfires. If we want to mitigate the costs of disasters like the 2021 flooding in the Fraser Valley or the 2018 flooding in Grand Forks, we need to change the way we manage our forest cover. Regenerative practices such as selective logging, small patch cutting, and other alternatives to clear-cutting are an important way forward." Pham noted that clear-cut logging causes more severe and much more frequent floods, and such floods can have harsh consequences. "They can negatively impact river ecosystems, degrade water quality in community watersheds, and cause sedimentation issues downstream. Thousands of lives and many ecosystems further downstream of clear-cut logging stand to be affected." Dr. Alila concludes, "Forests serve as the most effective natural defense against a global escalating flood risk attributed to factors such as climate change. Now is the time for water and forest management policies to start being guided by the most up-to-date and defensible science."

"NASA and NOAA's global temperature report confirms what billions of people around the world experienced last year; we are facing a climate crisis," said NASA Administrator Bill Nelson. "From extreme heat, to wildfires, to rising sea levels, we can see our Earth is changing. There's still more work to be done, but President Biden and communities across America are taking more action than ever to reduce climate risks and help communities become more resilient -- and NASA will continue to use our vantage point of space to bring critical climate data back down to Earth that is understandable and accessible for all people. NASA and the Biden-Harris Administration are working to protect our home planet and its people, for this generation -- and the next." In 2023, hundreds of millions of people around the world experienced extreme heat, and each month from June through December set a global record for the respective month. July was the hottest month ever recorded. Overall, Earth was about 2.5 degrees Fahrenheit (or about 1.4 degrees Celsius) warmer in 2023 than the late 19th-century average, when modern record-keeping began. "The exceptional warming that we're experiencing is not something we've seen before in human history," said Gavin Schmidt, director of GISS. "It's driven primarily by our fossil fuel emissions, and we're seeing the impacts in heat waves, intense rainfall, and coastal flooding." Though scientists have conclusive evidence that the planet's long-term warming trend is driven by human activity, they still examine other phenomena that can affect yearly or multi-year changes in climate such as El Niño, aerosols and pollution, and volcanic eruptions. Typically, the largest source of year-to-year variability is the El Niño -- Southern Oscillation ocean climate pattern in the Pacific Ocean. The pattern has two phases -- El Niño and La Niña -- when sea surface temperatures along the equator switch between warmer, average, and cooler temperatures. From 2020-2022, the Pacific Ocean saw three consecutive La Niña events, which tend to cool global temperatures. In May 2023, the ocean transitioned from La Niña to El Niño, which often coincides with the hottest years on record. However, the record temperatures in the second half of 2023 occurred before the peak of the current El Niño event. Scientists expect to see the biggest impacts of El Niño in February, March, and April. Scientists have also investigated possible impacts from the January 2022 eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha'apai undersea volcano, which blasted water vapor and fine particles, or aerosols, into the stratosphere. A recent study found that the volcanic aerosols -- by reflecting sunlight away from Earth's surface -- led to an overall slight cooling of less than 0.2 degrees Fahrenheit (or about 0.1 degrees Celsius) in the Southern Hemisphere following the eruption. "Even with occasional cooling factors like volcanoes or aerosols, we will continue to break records as long as greenhouse gas emissions keep going up," Schmidt said. "And, unfortunately, we just set a new record for greenhouse gas emissions again this past year." "The record-setting year of 2023 underscores the significance of urgent and continued actions to address climate change," said NASA Deputy Administrator Pam Melroy. "Recent legislation has delivered the U.S. government's largest-ever climate investment, including billions to strengthen America's resilience to the increasing impacts of the climate crisis. As an agency focused on studying our changing climate, NASA's fleet of Earth observing satellites will continue to provide critical data of our home planet at scale to help all people make informed decisions." Open Science in Action NASA assembles its temperature record using surface air temperature data collected from tens of thousands of meteorological stations, as well as sea surface temperature data acquired by ship- and buoy-based instruments. This data is analyzed using methods that account for the varied spacing of temperature stations around the globe and for urban heating effects that could skew the calculations. Independent analyses by NOAA and the Hadley Centre (part of the United Kingdom Met Office) concluded the global surface temperatures for 2023 were the highest since modern record-keeping began. These scientists use much of the same temperature data in their analyses but use different methodologies. Although rankings can differ slightly between the records, they are in broad agreement and show the same ongoing long-term warming in recent decades. Building on a half century of research, observations, and models, the Biden-Harris Administration including NASA and several federal partners recently launched the U.S. Greenhouse Gas Center to make critical climate data readily available to decisionmakers and citizens. The center supports collaboration across U.S. government agencies and the non-profit and private sectors to make air-, ground-, and space-borne data and resources available online. NASA's full dataset of global surface temperatures ( https://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/ ) through 2023, as well as details with code of how NASA scientists conducted the analysis, are publicly available from GISS. GISS is a NASA laboratory managed by the Earth Sciences Division of the agency's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. The laboratory is affiliated with Columbia University's Earth Institute and School of Engineering and Applied Science in New York.

Peat is a vast carbon sink: per square metre it is able to store more CO 2 than any other ecosystem in the world. The peatlands of the Netherlands, but also those in places such as Scandinavia and the Baltic states, therefore play an important role in the fight against climate change. However, peat is coming under increasing pressure and is extremely sensitive to the dry summers we are experiencing as a result of climate change. This is what researchers from the Radboud Institute for Biological and Environmental Sciences have concluded. 'In our lab, under controlled conditions, we first ensured that large blocks of peat were well moistened over a long period of time', explains lead author Bjorn Robroek. 'We then slowly dried the peat out. One half was exposed to mild drought, with the water level roughly five centimetres lower than the peat itself. The other half was subjected to extreme drought conditions; in this case the water was twenty centimetres below the peat. This is comparable to a period of three weeks without rain -- something that has also become increasingly common in the Netherlands in recent years.' These experiments revealed that peat exposed to mild drought still absorbs a reasonable amount of carbon. Robroek: 'Under extreme drought conditions, however, the peat can hardly take on any more carbon. In the event of an extended period of drought it even releases the carbon again.' Biodiversity Drought not only affects peatlands, of course. Dry summers have made other ecosystems more fragile too. However, in the case of grasslands, for example, we now have methods to combat problems caused by drought. Increasing the biodiversity in this kind of ecosystem (by incorporating a greater number of different plants), as in the case of the Future Dikes project, keeps the ecosystem healthy and resilient. Nevertheless, according to Robroek, when it comes to peatlands, improving biodiversity in this way is of little use in terms of tackling drought. 'The different mosses that we tested in our peat experiments do little to nothing to combat drought. That does not mean that biodiversity is not important for peat: it helps with carbon storage, for example. But in the battle against drought a different approach is needed.' Politics There are little things that consumers can do to protect peat. 'Buy peat-free potting substrate and compost, for example', cautions Robroek. 'In the end, however, this is mainly a problem that will have to be solved at political level. In the past the buffer zones alongside rivers often consisted of peatland, but today much of this is grassland intended for agricultural use. These areas are constantly mowed and ploughed and therefore hardly retain any water. As a result, water from these floodplains drains more quickly into the rivers, causing flooding.' 'Switching over to natural management methods costs time and money, but will have huge benefits in the future. Peatlands, even lowland peat areas, will then retain considerably more water and therefore offer much better protection. You could compare this to a sponge that gradually releases water back to the landscape. In such places peat is also the most effective option when it comes to storing carbon.'

The findings are outlined in a new report released today by the Global Water Monitor Consortium and led by ANU researchers. Lead author Professor Albert van Dijk, from ANU, said the report underscores the consequences of persistent fossil fuel burning on natural disasters, water resources, biodiversity and food security. "Record-breaking heat waves swept across the globe in 2023, shattering previous records, from Canada to Brazil and from Spain to Thailand," Professor van Dijk said. "The lack of rainfall and high temperatures exacerbated multi-year droughts in South America, the Horn of Africa and around the Mediterranean. "Extremely hot and dry conditions inflicted extensive ecological damage on the world's largest forests. Massive wildfires ravaged Canada during the northern summer, while the Amazon rainforest and rivers rapidly descended into severe drought in late 2023." Some of the worst disasters of 2023 were linked to unusually strong cyclones bringing extreme rainfall to New Zealand, Mozambique and Malawi, Myanmar, Greece, Libya and Australia. According to Professor van Dijk, who is also Chair of the Global Water Monitor Consortium, rising sea surface and air temperatures caused by fossil fuel burning have been intensifying the strength and rainfall intensity of monsoons, cyclones and other storm systems. This was also evident closer to home, where Cyclone Jasper battered northern Queensland and severe storms hit southeast Queensland. "Some areas around Cairns recorded more than 800 millimetres of rain. The torrential rains caused widespread flooding. That was because the cyclone moved much slower than expected," he said. "The recent cyclones and intensive storms in Queensland and elsewhere in Australia should not be seen as isolated freak events but part of a global pattern that was quite clear in 2023. "In 2023, we saw cyclones behave in unexpected and deadly ways. The longest-lived cyclone ever recorded battered southeastern Africa for weeks. "Warmer sea temperatures fuelled those freak behaviours, and we can expect to see more of these extreme events going forward." Professor van Dijk said the last two decades have seen increased air temperatures and declining air humidity, causing increased heat stress and water requirements for people, crops and ecosystems, while intensifying droughts. Relative air humidity over the global land surface in 2023 was the second driest on record after 2021, continuing a trend towards drier and more extreme conditions. 2023 was Earth's hottest year on record, showing what a typical future year with 1.5 degrees warming may look like. "A total of 77 countries experienced the highest average annual temperature in at least 45 years," Professor van Dijk said. Professor van Dijk said 2023 was a year of extremes, with increasing extreme dry and wet conditions and more unprecedented weather events. This is in line with ongoing changes in the water cycle over the last two decades. "The events of 2023 show how ongoing climate change is threatening our planet and lives more with every passing year," he said. "Globally, we're seeing an increase in the frequency and intensity of rainfall events and river flooding. But at the same time, there are also more frequent and faster developing droughts, or 'flash droughts'. "That can cause crop failure and destructive wildfires in a matter of weeks or months. With the global food challenge, biodiversity crisis and an extremely urgent need to reduce carbon emissions, these droughts and wildfires are among our greatest global threats." The research team used data from thousands of ground stations and satellites orbiting the Earth to provide real-time information on rainfall, air temperature, air humidity, soil and groundwater conditions, vegetation, river flows, flooding, and lake volumes. The Global Water Monitor is a collaboration between institutions across the world and involves various public and private organisations. The 2023 report is available on the Global Water Monitor website ( https://www.globalwater.online/globalwater/report.html ).

Researchers from the Curtin School of Population Health examined more than 385,000 pregnancies in Western Australia between 2000 and 2015, from 12 weeks prior to conception until birth. These pregnancies included 9.8% and 9.9% of children born too small and large for gestational age, respectively. The team focused on the relationship between low and high birthweights for gestational age and a person's outdoor heat or cold (biothermal) stress exposures during pregnancy. To do so, the researchers used the Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI), a modern composite biothermal tool that describes a person's physiological response to the thermal environment. It's the first study to use the UTCI to measure bioclimatic exposure before and during pregnancy and the risks of being born too small or large for gestational age. It found exposure to low and high biothermal stress during specific times in pregnancy appeared to be linked to a higher risk of babies being smaller or larger for their gestational ages at birth. The average biothermal exposure was between 8.1 and 30.0 degrees Celsius, a range that indicated slight cold stress and moderate heat stress on the UTCI scale. The study revealed extreme biothermal exposures -- 1 st percentile (cold stress) and 99 th percentile (heat stress), as compared to the median (no thermal stress), seemed to be most associated with changes in birthweight for gestational age. Study lead Dr Sylvester Dodzi Nyadanu said this was especially true during particular stages of pregnancy. "A baby's size at birth is strongly associated with mortality risk during the first year, with developmental problems in childhood and the risk of various diseases in adulthood," Dr Nyadanu said. "These findings support our concerns that the risk of having a baby too small or large for its gestational age appears to increase with exposure to environmental conditions that cause biothermal stress in the latter stages of pregnancy. "We also found other subpopulations were at higher risk of abnormal fetal growth due to exposure to biothermal stress, including non-Caucasian people, male births, pregnancies in those aged 35 and above, those in rural areas, and those who smoked during pregnancy." Dr Nyadanu said the study was part of growing evidence of climate change's threat to reproductive health by exacerbating heat or cold waves, vector-borne diseases, natural disasters such as cyclones, floods, droughts and wildfires, food and water insecurity and altering many natural and social environments which are worsening existing health challenges. "Thermal stress exposures increase dehydration and induce oxidative stress and systemic inflammatory responses, leading to adverse reproductive and foetal health outcomes," he said. "Our research adds to the growing collection of observational studies reporting on maternal exposure to ambient temperature and pregnancy outcomes such as pregnancy complications, preterm birth, stillbirth, and low birth weight. "There needs to be further studies into what interventions will achieve better results for parents and babies -- especially in the specific vulnerable subpopulations identified in our study. "Pregnancy is a vulnerable period for climate change and so any climate care intervention is reproductive health care."

While destination cities will work to sustainably accommodate swelling populations, aging coastal communities will confront stark new challenges, including an outflow of vital human infrastructure such as health care workers, said Associate Professor of Sociology Matt Hauer, lead author of the study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . "In the destination communities where populations are increasing you'll need more dentists, doctors, service workers, construction workers, etc.," Hauer said. "So by people moving, you affect other people's likelihood of moving. You get a demographic amplification." Previous studies estimated where people are likely to move as a changing climate affects livability. Hauer's study also incorporates demographic data and secondary effects that revealed a host of challenges awaiting both the coastal "sender" communities and their destination counterparts. "Imagine young families moving out of areas like Miami and moving to other locations and starting a family there," he said. "And just by the fact that there's more people who have moved there, these indirect population processes draw even more people." The study concluded that these indirect processes could create 5.3 to 18 times the number of climate migrants as those directly displaced by rising seas. It also found that by 2100, median age in coastal communities could spike as much as 10 years. "Think about who are more unlikely to move and who will be left behind in these communities; it tends to be the oldest," Hauer said. "Because migration is most likely to occur in more youthful populations, areas experiencing accelerated out-migration could face accelerated population aging." Doctoral student Sunshine Jacobs and computational scientist Scott Kulp co-authored the study with Hauer. The researchers developed a migration model that uses sea level rise data from Climate Central and information about migration patterns from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. That tool allowed them to predict migration on a county-by-county basis across the country. Jacobs said the model can be adapted to research different hazards that go beyond encroaching seas. "We only looked at sea level rise," she said. "Imagine other hazards that we know cause people to move, like heat events, wildfires and economic hazards. The future uses and implications of the model are amazing." This work was supported by the State of Louisiana, the American Society of Adaptation Professionals, the New York State Energy Research Development Authority, and the Great Lakes Integrated Sciences Assessment.

A recent study led by researchers at the University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science, assessed the perspectives of 76 diverse South Florida climate adaptation professionals. The study titled, "Practitioner perspectives on climate mobilities in South Florida" was published in the December issue of the Journal Oxford Open Climate Change , and explores the expectations and concerns of practitioners from the private sector, community-based organizations, and government agencies about the region's ability to adapt in the face of increasing sea level rise and diverse consequences for where people live and move, also known as climate mobility. Conducted through extensive interviews, the research underscores the growing significance of climate mobility as a crucial adaptive response in the face of increased climate challenges. While previous studies have primarily focused on resident perspectives on mobility, this study delves into the views of professionals, offering insights that could potentially shape future strategies and outcomes. "This study is a deep dive aiming to understand the perspectives of leading experts on where we are right now in our climate responses in South Florida," said Katharine Mach, lead author of the study and a professor and chair of the Department of Environmental Science and Policy at the Rosenstiel School. "These types of conversations are crucial to our prospects for unleashing innovations and successes in regional climate adaptations and preparedness." Key findings reveal a consensus among the professionals about the inevitability of various forms of climate mobilities in South Florida. Anticipated movements of people and infrastructure assets away from hazardous areas were highlighted, indicating an urgent need for comprehensive adaptation planning. However, while recognizing the necessity of climate mobility strategies, the interviewed practitioners expressed concerns regarding the current impact of such movements. They highlighted issues of distributional inequities, socio-cultural disruptions, and financial disparities arising from ongoing migrations and gentrification in which climate plays some role. The findings illuminated a critical gap between individual preparedness among practitioners and the overall readiness of the region to support and manage the expected climate-driven relocations. This discrepancy raises concerns about collective-action failures and the urgency for a more ambitious, long-term transition plan. Climate mobilities, while presenting benefits, also pose significant challenges. They serve as a path for adaptation planning and policies, prompting crucial questions about incorporation into policy planning and the need for fundamental innovations. According to the researchers, the study serves as an intervention itself, providing insights that might otherwise remain unexplored, fostering a deeper understanding of the challenges and opportunities associated with climate mobilities. The findings aim to inform and guide policymakers, stakeholders, and practitioners toward more proactive and inclusive approaches to climate adaptation. The study's authors include: Katharine J. Mach 1,2, Jennifer Niemann 1,2, Rosalind Donald 3 , Jessica Owley 1,2,4, Nadia A. Seeteram 5 , A.R. Siders 6,7, Xavier I. Cortada 2,4,8,9, Alex Nyburg 10 , Adam Roberti 11 , Ian A. Wright 12 1 Department of Environmental Science and Policy, Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA. 2 Leonard and Jayne Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA. 3 School of Communication, American University, Washington, DC, USA. 4 University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, FL, USA. 5 Columbia Climate School, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 6 Disaster Research Center, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA. 7 Biden School of Public Policy and Administration and Geography and Spatial Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA. 8 Department of Art and Art History, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA. 9 Department of Pediatrics, University of Miami Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. 10 Department of Biology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA. 11 Xavier Cortada Foundation, Pinecrest Gardens, FL, USA. 12 Department of Economics, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA The study was supported by the University of Miami Laboratory for Integrative Knowledge (U-LINK), the Leonard and Jayne Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy, the Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science and the U.S. National Science Foundation, award numbers 2034308 and 2034239.

These findings have critical implications for controlling the spread of disease caused by antibiotic-resistant pathogens after flooding events, particularly in the coastal regions of developing countries that are being highly impacted by the increase in tropical storms. The study, led by University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign civil and environmental engineering professor Helen Nguyen and graduate student Yuqing Mao, tracks the presence and origin of S. enterica from environmental samples from coastal North Carolina using genetic tracing. "Infections caused by antibiotic-resistant pathogens are responsible for approximately 2.8 million human illnesses and 36,000 deaths per year in the U.S. alone," Nguyen said. "These infections spread easily across the globe and are a major burden on burgeoning health care systems, but they are preventable through mitigation." The study reports that because human and animal fecal genetic markers are often found in flood waters, it is commonly assumed wastewater sources, septic systems and livestock farms are responsible for spreading antibiotic-resistant bacteria and genetic material into the environment. However, no known studies have conclusively identified contaminant source points. "Coastal North Carolina is a great case study area because there is a high concentration of swine farms and private septic systems, and coastal flooding caused by tropical storms is fairly common," Nguyen said. Three weeks after Hurricane Florence, Nguyen's team collected 25 water samples from water bodies downstream of the swine farms in agricultural production areas in North Carolina, 23 of which contained the S. enterica bacteria. "We analyzed free-floating genetic markers -- chromosomes and plasmids -- using high-fidelity whole-genome sequencing and found that S. enterica in the samples collected after Hurricane Florence were not from animals or manure," Nguyen said. The team genetically traced the bacteria's origin to the many small local rivers and streams in the area -- meaning that these pathogens have already established themselves in the natural environment. "With climate change bringing warmer temperatures -- in which bacteria thrive -- and possibly larger and more frequent tropical storms, the importance of our findings needs to be realized by researchers and policymakers," Nguyen said. "Agricultural and human wastewater should not be the only source considered when designing mitigation plans to prevent the spread of pathogenic bacteria after hurricanes." Nguyen's team plans to extend this research beyond coastal regions and is collaborating with other campus researchers to study the spread of pathogens from Canada goose feces in Illinois. Researchers from the Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, the Carle Illinois College of Medicine and the University of Florida also contributed to this study. The IGB, The Grainger College of Engineering, the Allen Foundation and the EPA supported this study.

Their finding comes after a research team led by Benjamin Wallis, a glaciologist at the University of Leeds, used satellites to track the Cadman Glacier, which drains into Beascochea Bay, on the west Antarctic peninsula. Between November 2018 and May 2021, the glacier retreated eight kilometres as the ice shelf at the end of the glacier -- where ice extends out into the sea and is anchored onto the sea floor at what is known as the grounding zone -- collapsed. (See image 1) The ice shelf would have acted as a buttress, slowing the movement of the glacier towards the sea. Surrounded by warmer ocean waters, the scientists believe the ice shelf thinned and became ungrounded, and the ice shelf was no longer able to hold back the glacier. As a result, the speed at which the glacier was flowing rapidly accelerated -- doubling its speed -- increasing the amount of ice it discharges into the sea as icebergs, through a process known as iceberg calving. Wallis said: "We were surprised to see the speed at which Cadman went from being an apparently stable glacier to one where we see sudden deterioration and significant ice loss. "What was also curious was that the neighbouring glaciers on this part of the west Antarctic Peninsula did not react in the same way, which may hold important lessons for the way we can better project how climate change will continue to affect this important and sensitive polar region. "Our study brought together data from three decades, nine different satellite missions, and in-situ oceanographic measurements to understand the changes happening in Antarctica. This demonstrates how important it is to have long term monitoring of the Earth's polar regions with a range of sensors which all tell us a different piece of the story." According to the scientists, the Cadman Glacier is now in a state of "substantial dynamic imbalance." The ice on the glacier has continued to thin, with elevation being lost at a rate of around 20 metres a year. That is equivalent to a loss in height of a five-storey building each year. And around 2.16 billion tonnes of ice are draining from the Cadman Glacier into the ocean each year. The researchers have published their analysis -- Ocean warming drives rapid dynamic activation of marine-terminating glacier on the west Antarctic Peninsula -- today (November 28) in the scientific journal Nature Communications. Why the Cadman Glacier became so unstable Unusually high ocean water temperatures in early 2018/19 around the west Antarctic peninsula are believed to have triggered the rapid dynamic change on the Cadman Glacier system. By analysing historic satellite data, the scientists believe warmer ocean waters gradually thinned the glacier's ice shelf from the early 2000s and possibly since the 1970s. The warmer water was not carried on the surface of the ocean but deep in the water column. This warmer water may have reached the ice shelf where it is grounded on the sea floor. The result is the ice shelf begins to melt from the bottom up. In 2018/19, the ice shelf was so thin that it broke free from the grounding zone and started to float, in effect slipping anchor and enabling the Cadman Glacier to drain more ice into the seas. But the scientific team still faced one big question. Why had the Cadman Glacier collapsed when the neighbouring Funk and Lever Glaciers remained relatively stable? Subsea ridges protect some glaciers By analysing subsea oceanographic data, they believe a series of subsea rock structures called ridges or sills, at a depth of 200 metres and 230 metres, acts as a defensive barrier, deflecting channels of warmer water from reaching the glaciers. Although they warn that a rise in ocean warming could compromise the ability of the ridges to protect some glaciers. Professor Michael Meredith, from the British Antarctic Survey and one of the authors of the paper, said: "We have known for some time that the ocean around Antarctica is heating up rapidly, and that this poses a significant threat to glaciers and the ice sheet, with consequences for sea level rise globally. "What this new research shows is that apparently stable glaciers can switch very rapidly, becoming unstable almost without warning, and then thinning and retreating very strongly. This emphasises the need for a comprehensive ocean observing network around Antarctica, especially in regions close to glaciers that are especially hard to make measurements." Writing in the paper, the researchers say what has happened to the Cadman Glacier can be seen as an example of a "glaciological tipping point," where a system in a steady state can take one or two paths based on a change in an environmental parameter. A tipping point was reached in 2018 caused by the arrival of unusually warm ocean water, which caused the ice shelf to unground. Reaching this tipping point caused the Cadman Glacier to increase its ice discharge by 28% in 13 months. The researchers say other glaciers on the Antarctic Peninsula may be vulnerable to similar sudden changes because of subsea geology.

Identifying how and why Antarctica's major ice sheets behaved the way they did in the early Miocene could help inform understanding of the sheets' behavior under a warming climate. Together, the ice sheets lock a volume of water equivalent to more than 50 meters of sea level rise and influence ocean currents that affect marine food webs and regional climates. Their fate has profound consequences for life nearly everywhere on Earth. While fluctuations in Antarctica's ice sheets have, over the span of millions of years, grown and diminished at regular intervals tied to natural oscillations in Earth's journey in orbit, researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and their collaborators around the world have uncovered evidence that Antarctica's ice sheets grew and shrank more frequently during the Miocene epoch than was previously known. This new evidence, published recently in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , indicates that between about 19.2 and 18.8 million years ago, the ice sheets grew and receded multiple times over cycles of just a few thousand years. That is much more rapidly than can be explained by periodic shifts in the planet's orbit and rotational axis, known as Milankovitch cycles, which typically advance slowly, altering Earth's climate and ice sheets over tens or hundreds of thousands of years. "Our observation of this rapid volatility of the Antarctic ice sheets raises the interesting question of what's causing it," says Nick Sullivan, a 2022 UW-Madison PhD graduate who led the analysis for his dissertation research. The study offers an unprecedented window into the sheets' past behavior, and it relies on a well-preserved sediment record from the Antarctic Drilling Project, or ANDRILL. The project was an international scientific collaboration to gather evidence of past climatic conditions via sediment and rock drilled from hundreds of meters below the Antarctic seabed. In 2006 and 2007, drilling in McMurdo Sound off the coast of Antarctica in an area influenced by both of the continent's large ice sheets recovered detailed sediment records from the Miocene, close to the ice sheet. "We could clearly see the influence of long-term climate cycles on ice sheet extent in the rock and sediment cores we recovered in 2007, but our initial observations weren't detailed enough to detect shorter-term changes," says co-author Richard Levy, a professor at Victoria University of Wellington and principal scientist at GNS Science, a public research institute in New Zealand. The latest analysis led by Sullivan now allows scientists to "document past ice sheet change on timescales as short as five centuries or so," says Stephen Meyers, a UW-Madison geoscience professor who worked with Sullivan in his analysis. In fact, Meyers calls it a remarkable archive. That's because it contains small bits of gravel that fell to the seafloor as icebergs drifted away from the ice sheets after breaking away. The amount of gravel in ocean sediment records ice sheet changes, such as when the edge of an ice sheet gets closer to or further away from that particular part of the seafloor. While testing for evidence of Milankovitch cycles within the sediment, Sullivan found variations in the abundance of gravel, suggesting nearby ice sheets advanced and retreated in recurring intervals as brief as 1,200 years. It's unclear what triggered the ice sheets to advance and retreat at these geologically frequent intervals, but the team proposes several potential causes based on prior studies of ice sheets. One idea suggests that the ice sheets, building up over time, became steeper and top heavy, leading them to collapse. Another proposes that as thick ice sheets advanced over rough terrain, heat from friction helped to temporarily speed them up. "There are likely multiple mechanisms that were going on and interacting with each other," says Sullivan, including variations in the local climate and the ocean. Scientists around the world are working to better understand the many factors beyond Earth's orbit that control ice sheet behavior as the planet continues to warm. The early Miocene isn't perfectly analogous to today's world, but the new study suggests Antarctica's ice sheets could change rapidly and in unexpected ways in the coming centuries if carbon dioxide levels and temperatures continue to rise due to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. "It was long thought that Antarctica's ice sheets remained large and stable over long periods of time. But the closer we look, the more we realize just how sensitive the ice sheets are to environmental change," says Levy. "This insight is key as we consider the pace at which we need to adapt to future sea level rise driven by melt and retreat of our planet's ice sheets."

The researchers used the tree rings to reconstruct plausible daily records of weather and streamflow scenarios during the 600-year period. This new approach, combining paleo information with synthetic weather generation, may help policymakers and scientists better understand -- and anticipate -- California's flood and drought risks and how they will be compounded by climate change. The group's paper published in Earth's Future , a journal of the American Geophysical Union. The San Joaquin Valley sits in the southern part of California's Central Valley, a major agricultural hub from which much of the nation gets its produce. Over the last few years, the region has seen a wild swing between severe drought and significant atmospheric rivers, which makes the valley a bellwether for the climate hazards that are facing the rest of California and much of the world, according to Patrick Reed, professor of engineering at Cornell University, and co-senior author of the paper. The models show how flood and drought extremes have evolved within the San Joaquin Valley and can help clarify how natural variability and climate change can compound each other's effects. "Folks typically want to separate out internal variability versus climate change, just to get a sense of the signal change with anthropogenic warming," Reed said. "But when we're planning in complex water systems, both are occurring. And we need a sense of what happens when they come together. And what happens is we get extremes we've never seen. This opens the envelope of plausible futures in a much wider sense." Among the findings: The research was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship.

Their work is published as a critical review in the journal Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews on October 22, 2023. More than half of the world's population presently resides in urban areas, and this number continues to rise. At the same time, urban areas are the most vulnerable to a changing climate and its associated challenges, including heatwaves, floods, storm surges, and other natural hazards. Cities are responsible for over 70 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions and consume more than two-thirds of the world's energy. Scientists know that it is necessary to move beyond the "business as usual" approach to achieving sustainable urban development. The importance of urban CAPs in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to the impacts of climate change is already well documented. Recent research has highlighted the need for urgent urban climate actions to drastically reduce greenhouse gas emissions and develop systems for climate adaptation. The Hiroshima University scientists noted the pressing need for a more scholarly criticism of the existing CAPs and their suitability in guiding climate adaptation and mitigation efforts. "Here, we propose the UCAP framework to guide the development of suitable CAPs that are comprehensive and consistent with globally accepted standards and benchmarks. Their study further pilot-tested the UCAP framework with climate plans from 257 cities worldwide," said Prince Dacosta Aboagye, a doctoral student from Ghana at Hiroshima University. The framework is intended to guide the development of suitable CAPs. In practice, their goal is for the framework to serve as a tool for developing city-specific CAPs that are consistent with acceptable climate action planning standards and benchmarks. In their UCAP framework, the scientists used approaches in relevant existing climate action planning tools. They also included emerging concepts from academic studies and climate planning reports to enhance the comprehensiveness of the framework. Their proposed UCAP framework includes 43 globally acknowledged criteria across three stages of climate planning. The suitability analysis shows that more than half of the existing urban CAPs have a medium level of suitability, with almost 40 percent having a weak level of suitability. "We discovered that urban CAPs adopted or published recently (since 2018) are more likely to be suitable than those adopted or published earlier (2015 to 2017). Remarkably, urban CAPs from the Global South are more suitable than those from the Global North, probably due to the influx of consultants and experts in supporting CAP development in Global South cities," said Ayyoob Sharifi, a professor at Hiroshima University. The authors hope to see more city governments adopting the UCAP framework to develop suitable climate plans to guide urban climate adaptation and mitigation efforts. This will contribute to reducing the climate risk of urban residents and play an integral role in achieving global climate goals. "In the future, we hope to explore the impacts of suitable CAPs on urban climate mitigation and adaptation efforts. We will build the capacity of city governments and policymakers on the use of the framework for developing and evaluating the suitability status of their CAPs. We will also urge corporate and educational institutions to adopt the UCAP framework in their climate planning," said Aboagye. The authors are Prince Dacosta Aboagye from the Graduate School of Humanities and Social Sciences at Hiroshima University and Ayyoob Sharifi from the IDEC Institute at Hiroshima University and the School of Architecture and Design, Lebanese American University.

The Arctic is currently warming nearly four times faster than the global average rate. The new study, published in the journal Earth System Dynamics , aimed to estimate the impact of this faster warming on how quickly the global temperature thresholds of 1.5C and 2C, set down in the Paris Agreement, are likely to be breached. To do this, the research team created alternative climate change projections in which rapid Arctic warming was not occurring. They then compared temperatures in this hypothetical world with those of the "real-world" models and examined the timing with which the critical Paris Agreement thresholds of 1.5C and 2C were breached. They found that, in the models without fast Arctic warming, the thresholds were breached five and eight years later respectively, than their "real-world" projected dates of 2031 and 2051. In addition, they found that disproportionately fast Arctic warming, known as Arctic amplification, added disproportionate uncertainty to forecasts, as the variation in model projections for the region is larger than for the rest of the planet. Alistair Duffey (UCL Earth Sciences), a PhD candidate and lead author of the study, said: "Our study highlights the global importance of rapid Arctic warming by quantifying its large impact on when we are likely to breach critical climate thresholds. Arctic warming also adds substantial uncertainty to climate forecasts." "These findings underscore the need for more extensive monitoring of temperatures in the region, both in-situ and via satellites, and for a better understanding of the processes occurring there, which can be used to improve forecasts of global temperature rise." The study does not attempt to quantify the ways in which Arctic warming affects the rest of the world, for instance through the retreat of sea ice which helps to keep the planet cool, but instead estimates the direct contribution of Arctic warming to global temperature increases. Co-author Professor Julienne Stroeve (UCL Earth Sciences, the University of Manitoba, Canada, and the U.S. National Snow and Ice Data Center) said: "While our study focuses on how Arctic warming affects global temperature change, the local impacts should not be overlooked. A 2C temperature rise globally would result in a 4C annual mean rise in the Arctic, and a 7C rise in winter, with profound consequences for local people and ecosystems. "In addition, rapid warming in the Arctic has global consequences that we do not account for in this study, including sea level rise and the thawing of permafrost which leads to more carbon being released into the air." Co-author Dr Robbie Mallett (University of Manitoba and Honorary Research Fellow at UCL Earth Sciences) said: "Arctic climate change is often overlooked by politicians because most of the region is outside national boundaries. Our study shows how much the Arctic impacts global targets like the Paris Agreement, and hopefully draws attention to the crisis that's already unfolding in the region." Arctic amplification, which is strongest in the winter months, is caused by several factors. One is the retreat of sea ice, meaning more sunlight (and heat) is absorbed by water instead of being reflected back into space. Another factor is less vertical mixing of air in the poles than in the tropics, which keeps warmer air close to the Earth's surface. For the study, researchers looked at an ensemble of 40 climate models that informed the UN's 2021 climate change report*. These models divide Earth's surface into a three-dimensional grid of cells, modelling physical processes occurring within each cell. The research team modified the output of the models to create an alternative world in which rapid Arctic warming was not occurring, by setting the rate of change of temperature in the region north of 66° North equal to that of the rest of the planet. They looked at how the removal of rapid Arctic warming would affect temperature projections in a plausible intermediate emissions scenario and calculated the average temperature projection across all models. In addition, they looked at how removing rapid Arctic warming from the models would affect more pessimistic or optimistic scenarios. For example, in a more optimistic scenario, where emissions are cut sharply and net zero is reached shortly after 2050, Arctic amplification causes a seven-year difference in the time of passing 1.5°C. Temperature projections for the Arctic varied more substantially between the models than for other parts of the globe, accounting for 15% of the uncertainty in projections, despite the region only making up 4% of the global surface area. The 1.5C and 2C limits are regarded as having been breached when average global temperatures over a 20-year period are 1.5C or 2C higher than in pre-industrial times. The goal of the Paris Agreement, an international treaty, is to keep the global average temperature to "well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels" and pursue efforts "to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C." The Arctic is thought to have warmed by 2.7C since the pre-industrial era, and this warming is believed to have accelerated since the start of the 21 st century. The study was supported by the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), the European Space Agency (ESA), and the Canada 150 Research Chairs Program. *The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's Sixth Assessment Report.

The model's simulations suggest this effect is large enough to make a meaningful contribution to global sea-level rise under high greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. The extra ice loss caused by this meltwater flowing out to sea from beneath Antarctic glaciers is not currently accounted for in the models generating major sea-level rise projections, such as those of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). If this process turns out to be an important driver of ice loss across the entire Antarctic ice sheet, it could mean current projections underestimate the pace of global sea-level rise in decades to come. "Knowing when and how much global sea-level will rise is critical to the welfare of coastal communities," said Tyler Pelle, the study's lead author and a postdoctoral researcher at Scripps. "Millions of people live in low-lying coastal zones and we can't adequately prepare our communities without accurate sea-level rise projections." The study, published October 27 in Science Advances and funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), NASA, and the Cecil H. and the Ida M. Green Foundation for Earth Sciences at the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at Scripps, modeled the retreat of two glaciers in East Antarctica through the year 2300 under different emissions scenarios and projected their contributions to sea-level rise. Unlike previous Antarctic ice sheet models, this one included the influence of this flow of meltwater from beneath glaciers out to sea, which is known as subglacial discharge. The two glaciers the study focused on, named Denman and Scott, together hold enough ice to cause nearly 1.5 meters (5 feet) of sea-level rise. In a high emissions scenario (IPCC's SSP5-8.5 scenario, which assumes no new climate policy and features 20% higher CO 2 emissions by 2100), the model found that subglacial discharge increased the sea-level rise contribution of these glaciers by 15.7%, from 19 millimeters (0.74 inches) to 22 millimeters (0.86 inches) by the year 2300. These glaciers, which are right next to each other, sit atop a continental trench that is more than two miles deep; once their retreat reaches the trench's steep slope, their contribution to sea-level rise is expected to accelerate dramatically. With the added influence of subglacial discharge, the model found that the glaciers retreated past this threshold about 25 years earlier than they did without it. "I think this paper is a wake up call for the modeling community. It shows you can't accurately model these systems without taking this process into account," said Jamin Greenbaum, co-author of the study and a researcher at Scripps' Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics. A key takeaway, beyond the understudied role of subglacial discharge in accelerating sea-level rise, is the importance of what humanity does in the coming decades to rein in greenhouse gas emissions, said Greenbaum. The low emissions scenario runs of the model did not show the glaciers retreating all the way into the trench and avoided the resulting runaway contributions to sea-level rise. "If there is a doomsday story here it isn't subglacial discharge," said Greenbaum. "The real doomsday story is still emissions and humanity is still the one with its finger on the button." In Antarctica, subglacial meltwater is generated from melting that occurs where the ice sits on continental bedrock. The main sources of the heat melting the ice in contact with the ground are friction from the ice grinding across the bedrock and geothermal heat from Earth's interior permeating up through the crust. Prior research suggested that subglacial meltwater is a common feature of glaciers around the world and that it is present under several other massive Antarctic glaciers, including the infamous Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica. When subglacial discharge flows out to sea it is thought to accelerate melting of the glacier's ice shelf -- a long floating tongue of ice that extends out to sea beyond the last part of the glacier that is still in contact with solid ground (known as the grounding line). Subglacial discharge is thought to speed up ice shelf melting and glacial retreat by causing ocean mixing that stirs in additional ocean heat within the cavity beneath a glacier's floating ice shelf. This enhanced ice shelf melting then causes the upstream glacier to accelerate, which can drive sea level rise. The notion that subglacial discharge causes additional ice shelf melting is widely accepted in the scientific community, said Greenbaum. But it hasn't been included in sea-level rise projections because many researchers weren't sure if the process' effect was sufficiently large to increase sea-level rise, mainly because its effects are localized around the glacier's ice shelf. Pelle said subglacial discharge came onto his radar in 2021 when he and his colleagues observed that East Antarctica's Denman Glacier's ice shelf was melting faster than expected given local ocean temperatures. Puzzlingly, Denman's neighbor Scott Glacier's ice shelf was melting much more slowly despite virtually identical ocean conditions. To test whether subglacial discharge could reconcile the melt rates seen at the Denman and Scott ice shelves, as well as whether subglacial meltwater might accelerate sea-level rise, the team combined models for three different environments: the ice sheet, the space between the ice sheet and bedrock, and the ocean. Once the researchers married the three models into one they ran a series of projections up to 2300 using a NASA supercomputer. The projections featured three main scenarios: a control that featured no additional ocean warming, a low emissions pathway (SSP1-2.6), and a high emissions pathway (SSP5-8.5). For each scenario, the researchers created projections with and without the effect of present-day levels of subglacial discharge. The model's simulations revealed that adding in subglacial discharge reconciled the melt rates seen at Denman and Scott Glaciers. As for why Scott Glacier was melting so much slower than Denman, Pelle said the model showed that "a strong subglacial discharge channel drained across the Denman Glacier grounding line, while a weaker discharge channel drained across the Scott Glacier grounding line." The strength of the discharge channel at Denman, Pelle explained, was behind its speedy melt. For the control and low-emissions model runs the contributions to sea-level rise were close to zero or even slightly negative with or without subglacial discharge at 2300. But in a high emissions scenario, the model found that subglacial discharge increased the sea-level rise contribution of these glaciers from 19 millimeters (0.74 inches) to 22 millimeters (0.86 inches) in 2300. In the high emissions scenario that included subglacial discharge, Denman and Scott Glaciers retreated into the two-mile-deep trench beneath them by 2240, about 25 years earlier than they did in the model runs without subglacial discharge. Once the grounding lines of the Denman and Scott Glaciers retreat past the lip of this trench their yearly sea-level rise contribution explodes, reaching a peak of 0.33 millimeters (0.01 inches) per year -- roughly half of the present-day annual sea-level rise contribution of the entire Antarctic ice sheet. Pelle said the trench's steep slope is behind this explosive increase in sea-level rise contribution. As the glacier retreats down slope, its ice shelf begins losing thicker and thicker slabs of ice from its leading edge. This process of ice loss quickly outpaces ice accumulation at the ice sheet's interior, causing further glacial retreat. Researchers refer to this process as "Marine Ice Sheet Instability," and it can promote explosive ice loss from glaciers like Denman and Scott. Researchers refer to topography such as the trench beneath Denman and Scott Glaciers as a retrograde slope and worry that it creates a positive feedback loop by which glacial retreat begets more retreat. Large areas of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, such as Thwaites Glacier, also have retrograde slopes that, while not as dramatic as the Denman-Scott trench, contribute to fears of broader ice sheet instability. "Subglacial meltwater has been inferred beneath most if not all Antarctic glaciers, including Thwaites, Pine Island, and Totten glaciers," said Pelle. "All these glaciers are retreating and contributing to sea-level rise and we are showing that subglacial discharge could be accelerating their retreat. It's urgent that we model these other glaciers so we can get a handle on the magnitude of the effect subglacial discharge is having." The researchers behind this study are doing just that. Pelle said they are in the process of submitting a research proposal to extend their new model to the entire Antarctic ice sheet. Future iterations of the model may also attempt to couple the subglacial environment with the ice sheet and ocean models so that the amount of subglacial meltwater dynamically responds to these other factors. Greenbaum said that the current version of their model kept the amount of subglacial meltwater constant throughout the model runs, and that making it respond dynamically to the surrounding environment would likely make the model more true to life. "This also means that our results are probably a conservative estimate of the effect of subglacial discharge," said Greenbaum. "That said, we can't yet say how much sea-level rise will be accelerated by this process -- hopefully it's not too much." Part of Greenbaum's upcoming fieldwork in Antarctica, supported by NSF and NASA, aims to directly investigate the impacts of subglacial meltwater in both the East and West Antarctic ice sheets. In collaboration with the Australian Antarctic Division and the Korea Polar Research Institute, Greenbaum and his collaborators will be visiting the ice shelves of Denman and Thwaites Glaciers in East and West Antarctica, respectively, looking for direct evidence that subglacial freshwater is discharging into the ocean beneath the glaciers' ice shelves and contributing to warming. In addition to Pelle and Greenbaum, the study was co-authored by Christine Dow of the University of Waterloo, Adrian Jenkins of Northumbria University, and Mathieu Morlighem of Dartmouth College.

"With events of this scale, it's very poorly understood what the costs of climate adaptation would be," said Rafael Schmitt, lead author of the paper, published Oct. 25 in Environmental Research Letters , and a lead scientist with NatCap. He noted that climate adaptation has been a second priority behind climate mitigation -- a trend now called the adaptation gap. But clearly, climate change is here now. "We were motivated by these big floods that are happening now every year, to ask: how can we conduct a very high-level assessment of what it would cost to adapt livelihoods to a changing climate? This could help countries and international donors evaluate the cost-effectiveness of specific adaptation measures," Schmitt added, noting the default is often to build back to the status quo, resulting in lack of preparedness for future floods, much as rebuilding from Pakistan floods in 2010 did. A new climate adaptation decision-support tool The researchers addressed two main options for adapting to future flooding in Pakistan, both of which have been widely implemented across Asia: "moving up" by building elevated structures, or "moving over" by temporarily relocating when floods occur. The depth of flooding -- and how far away dry land is -- are important factors for determining which response makes sense. Locations with shallow flood depths that are far from dry land would favor elevating buildings, while flood depths of greater than two meters make elevated structures impractical and too costly, based on experiences in nearby Bangladesh. Yet flood stage information (i.e., flood depth or severity) to help make this determination has been hard to come by. The team brought together satellite data on where flooding occurred, which are readily available in nearly real-time; ground elevation data combined with simplified hydrologic principles (e.g., water flows downhill) to reveal depth; and demographic data on population density, housing, and other infrastructure. This produced their "Floodplain Adaptation Strategies Testbed" or "FAST," a rapid overview of flood severity and exposure that shows how deep the flooding was in different locations, and how many people were exposed to those depths. Through FAST, the researchers estimated that 26.6 million people in Pakistan were exposed to low water levels (less than 1 meter), 7.4 million people were exposed to water levels between 1-2 meters, and 5.7 million people were exposed to more than 2 meters of flooding. Based on this and proximity to dry land, there were 27.5 million people in the "move up or over" category (in other words, either strategy could work), 5.1 million people in the "move over" category, 6.3 million people in the "move up" category, and half a million people in the retreat category (where the flood depths were greater than 2 meters and they're far from dry land). Focusing on the 7.4 million people who experienced 1-2 meters of flood depth, the analysis estimated adaptation costs between $1.5-$3.6 billion, in addition to the $5.8 billion to rebuild housing to the status quo. Prioritizing equity and resilience in rebuilding efforts This version of FAST looked only at housing but it could also be applied to other types of infrastructure, such as roads, schools, and hospitals. And in the future, its analyses could become even more detailed because of a new, more advanced, NASA Surface Water and Ocean Topography satellite, or SWOT. The researchers also recognize that there are other adaptation options besides "moving up or moving over." For example, local water agencies often rely on dikes, levees, and other "hard" infrastructure -- which the researchers warn can promote development in areas prone to flooding, increasing the risk of catastrophic damages if infrastructure fails. Whatever the mix of responses is, FAST could help provide information, but it must be checked to see whether and how these options meet actual community needs. Without analyses like FAST, reconstruction funding can often be directed to those with the greatest influence, who perhaps need the least support. "The study speaks to the potential to incorporate science-informed adaptation measures into reconstruction and disaster response, helping in investment prioritization. This is particularly useful nowadays with the discussions on mechanisms to compensate countries of the Global South for climate-change-attributed damages," said Edgar Virgüez, postdoctoral research scientist and deputy group leader at the Carnegie Department of Global Ecology at Stanford and a co-author of the study. The FAST tool could offer a more data-driven and equitable approach to prioritization. "Countries of the Global South, like my native Colombia, would benefit from process-based model assessments at scale and in a timely manner that can guide the investments of scarce resources. Especially since many of these countries lack timely-generated data, which complicates strategic decision investments," said Virgüez. An important outcome of the United Nations Climate Conference last year (COP27) was a new Loss and Damage Fund to provide financial support for countries that are most vulnerable to climate change. In this paper, the team urged funders and governments to rebuild with adaptation in mind. To do that, they say, more science should also be directed toward understanding low-cost adaptation options. "Flood models are data-intensive, and you need specialized knowledge to run them," said Schmitt. "We need adaptation research that is easier to use and act on. FAST is a step toward that goal."

Taking into account climate variability like El Niño, they found no significant difference between mid-range emissions scenarios and the most ambitious targets of the 2015 Paris Agreement. Even under a best-case scenario of 1.5°C global temperature rise, melting will increase three times faster than during the 20 th century. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet is losing ice and is Antarctica's largest contributor to sea-level rise. Previous modelling finds this loss could be driven by warming of the Southern Ocean, particularly the Amundsen Sea region. Collectively the West Antarctic Ice Sheet contains enough ice to raise global mean sea-level by up to five metres. Around the world millions of people live near the coast and these communities will be greatly impacted by sea level rise. A better understanding of the future changes will allow policymakers to plan ahead and adapt more readily. Lead author Dr Kaitlin Naughten, a researcher at the British Antarctic Survey says: "It looks like we've lost control of melting of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. If we wanted to preserve it in its historical state, we would have needed action on climate change decades ago. The bright side is that by recognising this situation in advance, the world will have more time to adapt to the sea level rise that's coming. If you need to abandon or substantially re-engineer a coastal region, having 50 years lead time is going to make all the difference." The team simulated four future scenarios of the 21 st century, plus one historical scenario of the 20 th century. The future scenarios either stabilised global temperature rise at the targets set out by the Paris Agreement, 1.5°C and 2°C, or followed standard scenarios for medium and high carbon emissions. All scenarios resulted in significant and widespread future warming of the Amundsen Sea and increased melting of its ice-shelves. The three lower-range scenarios followed nearly identical pathways over the 21 st century. Even under the best-case scenario, warming of the Amundsen Sea sped up by about a factor of three, and melting of the floating ice shelves which stabilise the inland glaciers followed, though it did begin to flatten by the end of the century. The worst-case scenario had more ice shelf melting than the others, but only after 2045. The authors heed that this high fossil fuel scenario, where emissions increase rapidly, is considered unlikely to occur. This study presents sobering future projections of Amundsen Sea ice-shelf melting but does not undermine the importance of mitigation in limiting the impacts of climate change. Naughten cautions: "We must not stop working to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels. What we do now will help to slow the rate of sea level rise in the long term. The slower the sea level changes, the easier it will be for governments and society to adapt to, even if it can't be stopped."

For their meta-study, the 30 authors analyzed more than 1,400 academic studies on climate change adaptation. By doing so, they offer the first global overview of which groups of actors are pursuing adaptation -- and how. Their findings show that the global distribution of tasks lacks cohesion. Above all, there are few concepts designed to better prepare societies, infrastructures and risk management for the impacts of climate change. Extensive collaborations between various government and non-government actors are also lacking. "Our study indicates that climate change adaptation continues to be largely isolated and uncoordinated," says Dr. Kerstin Jantke, a co-author and environmental researcher at Universität Hamburg's Cluster of Excellence CLICCS. "That's disproportionate to how pressing and vital this challenge is." Dr. Jan Petzold, the study's first author, sees a need for action: "Comprehensive, just and forward-thinking adaptation can be considered to be successful when not only official organizations but also a broad range of groups at all levels are involved." Petzold, currently a geographer at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, was a member of the Cluster of Excellence CLICCS until the fall of 2021. To date, primarily individuals and households are taking measures to adapt to climate change impacts, especially in the Global South; very few of them are integrated into institutional frameworks. However, there is also an urban-rural divide: While individual households are largely active in rural areas, government actors tend to coordinate adaptation in cities. In many cases, the role of governments -- global, national and regional -- consists in ratifying, planning and financing adaptation measures, while small households are who do most of the technical implementation. According to the study, the scientific community's involvement in adaptation measures is limited, while that of the private economy is virtually non-existent. "If, around the globe, it's predominantly individuals like farmers and smallholders who are doing the heavy lifting, it also shows us the lack of cooperation between different groups of actors -- which is a prerequisite for sustainable adaptation projects," says Jan Petzold. Coordinated concepts are indispensable for far-reaching measures like the climate-aware restructuring of forests, transforming farmland into floodplains, planning new urban infrastructures, and relocating coastal communities. Involving different groups of actors can also help avoid undesired effects of adaptation measures. "If I only design a given measure to address a single, pressing problem, it could make the situation worse in other areas," says Kerstin Jantke. For example, levees and dams designed to protect from flooding could destroy coastlines and wetlands, reducing biodiversity or natural CO2 sinks. Consequently, comprehensive measures should ideally be oriented on the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), helping ensure it offers solutions that are tenable in the long term.

Comparisons with other major tropical rivers show that the Ruki may even be the blackest large blackwater river on Earth -- it's certainly a lot darker than the famous Rio Negro in the Amazon. The reason the water is black is that it contains large amounts of dissolved organic material and hardly any sediment because of the river's low gradient. These carbon-rich substances are mostly washed into the river by the rain, which falls on dead jungle vegetation and leaches out organic compounds from the decomposing plant material. What's more, the river floods the forest in the rainy season. It can take weeks for the often waist-deep water to slowly retreat, during which time it leaches organic substances. "The Ruki is essentially jungle tea," Drake says. Peaty bogs and virgin rainforest It's not just the dark water that's special. The Ruki, which is one kilometre wide and empties into the Congo, is unique in its entirety. Its drainage basin, which is four times the size of Switzerland, is still covered by untouched primary lowland rainforest. Along the river, there are big peat bogs containing gigantic amounts of undecomposed dead plant material, which makes them significant carbon sinks. Despite its uniqueness and size, the Ruki has never before been scientifically studied. While the river's different seasonal water levels have been documented since the 1930s, no data on its chemical composition has been available up to now. Nobody had yet determined how much dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is in the water and, above all, where it comes from. So in 2019, Drake and his colleagues set up a measuring station near the city of Mbandaka, a short distance upstream from where the Ruki and the Congo converge, and measured the water discharge every two weeks and daily water level for a year to determine the annual streamflow. "Our measurement methods on site were quite basic," Drake says. He relates that Mbandaka has no permanent power supply, only a few diesel generators and hardly any infrastructure -- not even a power drill to install the flood level marker. "So we often had to improvise," he says with a smile. What water samples reveal about the Ruki Water samples were collected with each discharge measurement and sent to the lab at ETH Zurich for analysis. There, the researchers determined the samples' DOC content as well as the age of the organic material based on the radioactive carbon in the DOC. Among other things, they wanted to find out whether the peat along the river releases carbon (and at some point decomposes into CO 2 ). The researchers decided to examine the water because it contains carbon signatures from the entire drainage area, which in turn convey information about origin and land use. The advantage of water analysis: "We need to collect samples from only one location to gain information about a huge area -- like a doctor who takes a blood sample to determine the condition of a patient's health," says the study's coauthor, Matti Barthel. Unexplored hydrology The analyses confirmed the visual impression: "The Ruki is one of the most DOC-rich river systems in the world," Barthel says. Its water contains four times as much organic carbon compounds as the Congo's and 1.5 times as much as the Rio Negro's in the Amazon. And although the Ruki's drainage basin makes up only a twentieth of the entire Congo Basin, a fifth of the dissolved organic carbon in the Congo comes from this one tributary. DOC usually comes in the form of organic acids that increase the acidity of the river water. This stimulates the release of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) as the acids dissolve carbonates present in the water. "CO 2 emissions are relatively high across the Ruki's entire drainage basin but not dissimilar to other tropical rivers," Drake explains. This is because the Ruki is a sluggish and placid river, which makes it more difficult for the CO 2 in the water to escape into the air. "In a turbulent river, we'd see higher emissions," he says. According to Drake, the carbon isotope analysis also shows that most of the carbon comes from the forest vegetation, not the peat. Only for a short period of time at the end of the rainy season between March and April, after peak flow, do the researchers find evidence of the peat bogs releasing carbon into the water. It's not clear how and why this happens at that particular time. "Overall, however, we see very little peat in the river," Drake says. "And that's good news, because it also means that the peat bogs are stable." At present, he says, there is no danger that the organic material contained in the peat bogs will be released, since they are under water almost all year round and thus not exposed to oxygen. However, companies have taken an interest in the Ruki Basin's natural resources. Changes in land use such as deforestation could alter the river regime. This might lead to peat bogs falling dry and being decomposed by bacteria, which would release a huge amount of CO 2 . "The peat bogs in the Congo Basin store some 29 billion tonnes of carbon," Barthel says. "It would be better for the climate if they stayed wet. A long-standing research project Johan Six and his group have been studying the Congo Basin's carbon cycle since 2008. The Congo is one of the most important tropical river systems on Earth. It carries huge amounts of carbon out into the sea. The vegetation in its drainage basin affects its carbon cycle, as does land use. It was during a scouting trip to study the carbon cycle -- the biogeochemistry -- of the Congo Basin that the researchers came across the Ruki River. After their side trip to the Ruki, the scientists are now studying other tributaries of the Congo, such as the Kasaï and the Fimi River -- and completing the carbon puzzle piece by piece.

Crop residues are an important resource in agriculture. They contribute carbon to the soil, increase soil fertility and play an important role in the agricultural ecosystem, but they also play a role in relation to energy supply and recycling of nutrients. Crop residues can be very diverse and have widely different composition and properties. They can be cover crops, grass, grass-clover, vegetables, straw, etc. They may consist of residues from roots or from aboveground crop parts. "All in all, there is large diversity in the quality of the crop residues that are added to the soil as part of the general cultivation practice," says Professor and Department head Jørgen E. Olesen from the Department of Agroecology at Aarhus University. He has headed a new scientific study highlighting the differences in crop residues and how they affect nitrous oxide emissions from agricultural fields in different ways. "Crop residues are essential for maintaining soil fertility, and in addition, they play a major role in maintaining or increasing the carbon content in the soil. Unfortunately, they also contribute to the emission of nitrous oxide," says Jørgen E. Olesen. Clash with current emission inventories IPCC -- The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change -- prepares guidelines for how to make national inventories of greenhouse gas emissions, including nitrous oxide emissions, when crop residues are returned to the fields. Fact box: IPCC -- The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (FN´s Klimapanel) The IPCC is an international organisation established in 1988 by the World Meteorology Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). The purpose of the IPCC is to assess scientific knowledge about climate change, its causes, impacts and possible adaptation and mitigation strategies. The IPCC plays a key role in gathering and assessing the latest scientific literature on climate change and preparing reports that inform politicians and decision-makers worldwide. IPCC reports are used as the basis for international climate negotiations and policy development. The organisation is known for publishing comprehensive assessments of climate science, including reports on greenhouse gases, sea level rises, temperature changes and other aspects of climate change. The work of the IPCC therefore plays a crucial role in understanding and managing climate change at global level. The IPCC's inventory method includes nitrous oxide from crop residues such as annual cereal and seed crops, root crops, vegetables, fodder crops and grassland renewal. "Non-harvestable crops such as cover crops are not taken into account," explains Jørgen E. Olesen, who adds that the biochemical properties of crop residues and their degradability of carbon and nitrogen are also not included in the accounting of emissions. "The current method only considers the nitrogen content in the plant residues, but our studies show that the degradability of carbon in plant residues actually is more important. There is therefore a need for an improved accounting method so that inventories are accurate and mitigation measures can be effective," says Jørgen E. Olesen. Difference between ripe and unripe crop residues According to the researchers, there may be large differences in how much nitrous oxide the crop residues emit. "Many different factors come into play when you look at the extent of nitrous oxide emissions from crop residues. A very important factor is the concentration of degradable carbon and nitrogen. When the concentration is high, the potential for producing nitrous oxide also increases," says Jørgen E. Olesen. You often see a high concentration of both easily degradable carbon and nitrogen in immature crop residues, such as cover crops, grass, legumes and vegetables, while mature crop residues such as straw do not have such high concentrations. "A distinction between mature and immature crop residues could help to ensure a more accurate estimation of the short-term effects of crop residues on nitrous oxide emissions. For the more long-term effects, i.e., years and decades, we should account for the residual effects on soil quality and nitrogen content. They are affected by local climatic conditions, just as the soil conditions are of importance," says Jørgen E. Olesen. Targeted mitigation of nitrous oxide emissions "There is a critical need for new and targeted strategies when it comes to reducing nitrous oxide from crop residues. Globally, approx. 9% of agricultural emissions of nitrous oxide stem from the input of crop residues to the fields. However, such strategies require that the accounting of emissions from crop residues becomes more accurate," says Jørgen E. Olesen. A distinction between mature and immature crop residues may be an approach that, according to the researchers, could improve the accuracy of the inventories. It will also improve the possibilities of targeting and finding appropriate mitigation strategies. "Reviewing how we calculate emissions from specific crop residues and determine the right time and place to use them requires more research. There are also important questions in the research into emissions from crop residues that we still need to answer," says Jørgen E. Olesen, who points out that there is a need for more research into:

The 17 experts, including Prof Robert Nicholls, Professor of Climate Adaptation at the University of East Anglia (UEA), have contributed to the paper, 'Status of global coastal adaptation', which is published today in Nature Climate Change . Prof Nicholls said: "Recent analyses conclude that despite adaptation undertaken in all regions and sectors, global action remains incremental in scale: policies and projects are usually short-sighted and single hazard-focused, inadequately address the root causes of exposure and vulnerability, and are poorly monitored. There is also little evidence of effective risk reduction in relation to implemented responses." To address these problems, the experts say decisive action by the international policy community is needed to identify and tackle global priorities in key risk areas across countries. Dr Alexandre Magnan, of the Institute for Sustainable Development and International Relations (IDDRI), is first author of the paper. Dr Magnan said: "Assessing climate adaptation is a burning scientific and policy question because, as today's global climate risk will experience a two- to four-fold increase by the end of this century depending on the global greenhouse gas emissions trajectory, we need to know the current status toward addressing its consequences. "New, alternative methods to assess adaptation are urgently needed in order carry out effective planning and action, evidence on risk reduction, capabilities and create a long-term vision." The paper considered 61 coastal case studies to develop a locally informed perspective on the state of global coastal adaptation. It looked at both extreme events and low-onset climate change, including coastal erosion, marine flooding, sea-level rise and extremes, soil and groundwater salinization, inland flooding resulting from heavy precipitations, and permafrost thaw. While strategies for urban coastal areas are generally more advanced than rural ones, the experts said plans for long-term adaptations remain limited. The experts concluded that today's global coastal adaptation is half-way to the full adaptation potential. Taking sea-level rise as one example, the experts said the risks to low-lying coasts are already detectable. Prof Nicholls said: "By the end of the century and in the absence of ambitious adaptation efforts, these risks will become significant, widespread and possibly irreversible in atolls and arctic coasts. The lower estimates for deltas are still a concern given these geographies' population sizes and economic importance globally." The expert group developed a qualitative structured judgment -- the Global Adaptation Progress Tracker (GAP-Track) -- to assess adaptation efforts, progress and gaps, as part of the framework for the Global Goal on Adaptation established under the Paris Agreement in 2015. Dr Magnan said: "Countries still struggle finding a way to operationalize the Global Goal on Adaptation and to conduct the Global Stocktake (GST) series that aims to collectively track adaptation progress and gaps, with a first iteration due at COP28 in the United Arab Emirates. "The multi-dimensional and locally grounded assessment developed in this study for coastal adaptation confirms the need to drastically scale up adaptation policy and action around the globe, from local governments and stakeholders to the international climate policy arena. "We are arguing that the approach developed in this paper can play a decisive role in helping refine both targets and priorities."

The study was just published in the journal Environmental Research Letters . "Most studies focus on the direct effects of inundation," said lead author Nadia Seeteram, a postdoctoral researcher at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. "Here, we were able to look at flooding on a very granular level, and add in other vulnerabilities." The study combines building-by-building projections of flooding caused by direct sea-level rise, rainfall or storm surge with fine-grained demographic data to determine how residents will be affected. Along with flood maps, the researchers used U.S. Census Bureau data to chart economic and social factors that would make people more or less vulnerable, including age, race, level of education, income and status of employment, and whether they owned or rented their homes, among other measures. They then divided the population into four categories. With a one-meter sea-level increase -- a middle-of-the-road scenario for the end of this century -- 56 percent of the population, primarily on higher ground, could face pressures to relocate, they say. The researchers call these people "displaced." The next largest group they labeled the "trapped" -- some 19 percent of the population, living in chronically flooded territory, but without the means to flee to safer nearby ground. About another 19 percent would be "stable," according to the researchers -- living in areas not prone to flooding and able to remain there. Just 7 percent -- basically the wealthiest, which the researchers labeled as "migrating" -- would be directly exposed to flooding in waterfront or low-lying areas, but able to move to safer spots within the metro area. Not surprisingly, the study says that if sea levels rise even more than a meter, direct flooding, not economic pressures, will become the dominant force affecting residents. At two meters -- fairly high amid the current range of estimates, but not out of the question -- about 55 percent of the population will be directly inundated through a combination of high sea level and, to an increasing extent, rainfall. Under this scenario, 49 percent of the population would become trapped, and 25 percent displaced. Only 8 percent would be classified as stable. "This is where it gets to be more drastic, more existential," said Seeteram, who did much of the research during her Ph.D. studies at Florida International University. In either scenario, she said, the results would include potential depopulation of the area and devaluation of flooded properties, as people flee to safer inland regions. This could make it increasingly difficult for authorities to collect taxes to fund adaptations of infrastructure to keep the ocean at bay -- a circular process that could send Miami-Dade into an increasingly dire downward spiral, both physical and fiscal. The study does not look at how many people are currently being affected by flooding, either directly or indirectly. But floods have already become a routine part of life, as monthly peaks in tides percolate up through the sewers during so-called sunny day flooding, and rain with nowhere to drain pools in streets. The kind of flash flooding in New York City that made big news after a big storm at the end of September would be viewed as just another day in parts of Miami during the May-October wet season, said Seeteram. A still unpublished survey by Seeteram and colleagues indicates that nearly three quarters of Miamians say they have been personally affected by flooding from rainfall in one way or another. There are also some indications that so-called climate gentrification -- the displacement of lower-income people from higher-elevation areas predicted by the study -- is already taking place. For instance, in the last few years, the Little Haiti neighborhood, a relatively lofty 10 feet above sea level, has seen a sudden surge in development and property values, worrying the largely Black residents that they may not be able to remain. Study coauthor Katharine Mach of the University of Miami said there is " a great, raging debate" about whether climate gentrification is underway. "I suspect it is already happening," she said. However, she said, at least for now, other factors may be playing larger roles in rapidly shifting real-estate values, including longtime pro-development policies and what she calls "real-estate tourism," with speculators snapping up relatively inexpensive properties in a still booming region. "The question is, what fraction [of rising prices] can you put on climate?" she said. She pointed out that real-estate prices are also going up in low-lying and waterfront areas, but not as fast as in less flood-prone areas -- one possible indicator that predicted sea-level rise is playing a role in buyers' decisions. Seteeram said the projections in the new study may not necessarily come to pass, at least with lower estimates of sea-level rise; it depends on how the metro area confronts the problems in coming years. If it revamps infrastructure to lessen flooding and takes other measures, that could blunt the effects, she said. "We could see different kinds of housing development, to make the population denser in some areas, or more climate resilient. But then you would have to see what the intersection would be with affordability for a lot of people." The other authors of the study are Kevin Ash of the University of Florida, Gainesville, and Brett Sanders and Jochen Schubert of the University of California, Irvine.

In some scenarios, the researchers predict that the reduction in snowpack will be less than half what has been predicted -- good news for the many people who rely on subsequent snowmelt in high mountains for water and food production, as well as for those who depend on winter recreation. The findings come from scientists at the Department of Energy's Pacific Northwest National Laboratory who weighed several factors that affect snowpack. These include warming temperatures, pollution, dust and even the shape of snow grains as they pack together on the ground. The findings were published October 2 in Nature Communications . Clean snow vs. dirty snow "Snow is not just snow," said Dalei Hao, first and corresponding author of the study. "There's clean snow and there's dirty snow, and how they respond to sunlight is very different. And then there are the shapes of the snow grains, which are anything but uniform. These all affect the snowpack." Of course, the warmer it is, the more snow melts. That's why the coming decades spell bad news for mountain snowpacks and the people who rely on them. Researchers estimate that 2 billion people rely on spring and summer snowmelt in the mountains to provide fresh water for drinking and food production. If mountain snow melts faster or earlier than usual, that spells trouble -- swollen rivers and flooding in the spring, then parched crops and wells in late summer. "There have been a lot of alarming projections about the future snowpack. It's a critically important issue," said PNNL scientist Ruby Leung, also a corresponding author of the study. "The Himalayas, for instance, are the headwaters for several major rivers in southeast and eastern Asia. The condition of the snowpack in mountains has a direct effect on the quality of life for millions of people." Of all the factors affecting future snowpack, the biggest in the study were temperature and the effect of dark particles like pollution and dust. Those particles absorb more sunlight than pure snow, warming faster and passing along the sun's warmth to nearby snow. That's why snow peppered with dark specks melts faster than clean snow. These particles come from human activity, such as car and truck emissions or burning wood. Or they can come naturally from blowing dust -- though how much dust blows and settles on snow is often a direct result of what people do. While clean snow reflects an estimated 80 to 90 percent of sunlight, dirty snow reflects less -- a huge variable that the PNNL team said has not been studied as thoroughly as the effect of temperature. Researchers believe that cleaner snow can be expected in the future, due to less pollution and less wood burning. Warmer air vs. cleaner snow But the cleaner snow will most certainly come at a time of warmer temperatures, which lower the snowpack in many ways. The simplest explanation is that less precipitation falls as snow and more as rain. Warmer temperatures also melt the snow that has fallen. "Warming temperatures and cleaner snow are competing effects," said Leung. "Our paper indicates that the warming effect is dominant, but that cleaner snow will cancel out some of the effect. We are not saying that snow will increase in the future. We're saying that snow will not decrease in the future as much as it otherwise might." The researchers studied snowpack trends in high mountains in the Northern Hemisphere, using 1995-2014 as the historical basis. That period of rising temperatures and a dirty snowpack was a recipe for a very fast snow melt. Then they modeled snowpack trends from 2015 to 2100 using two different scenarios, one where carbon dioxide emissions continue to rise markedly and one where emissions decline. The team focused on the Tibetan Plateau in Asia and the western United States. In both scenarios, temperatures are expected to warm; the deposition of dark particles known as black carbon is expected to decrease; and dust is expected to increase. If carbon dioxide emissions rise due to continued fossil fuel use in a scenario known as the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway or SSP 585, temperatures rise significantly. When changes in dark particles aren't considered, the team estimates a snowpack loss of about 58 percent. But cleaner snow from less pollution -- even with more light-absorbing dust -- reduces that loss by 8 percent. If carbon dioxide emissions are curtailed significantly (SSP 126), snowpack loss is much less. When changes in dark particles aren't considered, the team estimates a snowpack loss of about 15 percent. But when the cleaner snow is factored in, snowpack loss is slashed by more than half -- 52 percent. The diversity of snow grain shapes and other factors Anyone who has driven in a blizzard can attest to the chaos and uncertainty that can be caused by snow. That's also true for scientists like Hao who are finding a not-so-subtle effect of snow grain shape. Earlier this year, Hao and colleagues noted that the varied shapes of real snow grains make snow melt more slowly than in models where grains are assumed to be uniformly spherical. Spherical snow grains would absorb more sunlight and melt more snow; the odd shapes of real flakes reflect more sunlight and melt less snow. The findings were reinforced this summer by a team of French scientists. That would mean that real snow packed on the ground melts more slowly than many models using "spherical flakes" have indicated. That's part of the reason for the team's findings. A bevy of other factors come into play as well. For example, warmer temperatures translate to more wildfires, producing more dark particles. But Hao notes that wildfire activity peaks in the summer and fall, before snow falls in heavy amounts in the mountains, so the effect in late spring when snow melts would likely be minimal. Then there's the loss of "biological soil crust," where bacteria, lichens, algae and other organisms infiltrate and stabilize the soil surface. Researchers expect this type of soil to be reduced as temperatures warm -- one reason, along with increased land development, that more dust is expected in the future. While there are many factors in play, the PNNL team found that rising temperatures and reduced dark particles are the two most powerful factors influencing the future snowpack. "Most models have not looked at these two effects, warming and dirty snow, together when projecting future changes," said Leung. "It's important to do so, because they can have opposite effects. Determining which one is the more dominant influence is a key to determining the fate of the snowpack in the future." In addition to Hao and Leung, authors include PNNL scientists Gautam Bisht, Hailong Wang, Donghui Xu, Huilin Huang and Yun Qian. The research was funded by DOE's Office of Science. The team used computing resources at the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science user facility at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

That's the finding by assistant professor Simon Zwieback at the University of Alaska Fairbanks Geophysical Institute in a study published Sept. 27 by the journal Permafrost and Periglacial Processes . Zwieback is the paper's lead author. UAF scientists Mikhail Kanevskiy, Donald Walker, Vladimir Romanovsky and Franz Meyer are among the nine co-authors. Zwieback, who also teaches at the UAF College of Natural Science and Mathematics, specializes in using space-borne remote sensing to study the Arctic. "What previously hadn't been known is that subsequent to the flood there were diffuse and variable changes to tundra and to this permafrost landscape," Zwieback said. "In particular, we observed that in areas that were flooded, there were several hotspots of subsidence with subsidence exceeding 3 inches over a few years. And we also observed many more areas with less pronounced but still measurable sub-segments. "We also observed a green-up and a wettening of the landscape, which was also quite variable," he said. "All of this is important for understanding how these landscapes react to floods." Floodwaters began spilling onto the Dalton Highway, Alaska's road to the North Slope, in mid-May 2015 and also reached Deadhorse airport. A pre-flood buildup of aufeis, layered ice that formed from the freezing of river water, is seen as the leading cause of the chaotic flooding. Aufeis diverted the thawing river's water away from natural channels. The river's massive floodwaters exacerbated what the authors describe as a "complicated relationship" between rivers and their floodplains in regions of continuous permafrost. Human activity in the area, driven by continued expansion of the Prudhoe Bay oilfield and the presence of the Dalton Highway, has also interfered with natural drainage. The flood may have stimulated subsidence by warming the ground, causing ground ice to melt, the authors state. Warming can be due to increased wetness, disturbance to the protective layer of organic matter or sediment deposition, allowing more heat to penetrate. Zwieback analyzed satellite data from 2015 through 2019 to estimate ground deformation over the post-flood years. "What we did observe from space was widespread but also quite variable subsidence," Zwieback said. Subsidence was most pronounced in flooded locations and was most active in the two years after the flood. "We interpret the subsidence that we observed with remote sensing to be largely due to melting of ground ice," Zwieback said. "Soils in the area contain substantial quantities of ice in the form of ice wedges and segregated ice, small lenses of ice as opposed to big chunks." Ice wedges are generally anywhere from about 3 to 10 feet across and about 6 to 10 feet deep at their narrow bottom. They form regular networks and in the study area are typically found about 30 feet apart. "One of the main complicating factors here is that initial subsidence can trigger changes at the surface, such as ponding of water," Zwieback said. "The surface becomes darker and warmer. And that means more thawing underneath, because you have changed the surface conditions." Subsidence occurred in some areas with high ice content but not in others, indicating multiple factors driving deformation. These can include organic layer disturbance and sediment deposition, which settles into the soil and drives out its insulating air pockets and allows more heat to penetrate. Researchers found fine grain sediment in the top 2 inches of soil plugs taken at two locations but could not conclusively state the sediment derived from the flood, despite the sample site being nearly 1,000 feet from the highway. Researchers also found that, on average, subsiding ice-rich locations showed increases in greenness and wetness. Conversely, many ice-poor floodplains greened without deforming. Nevertheless, the paper notes that flooding can be beneficial in the long term. It deposits sediment, which in turn allows for an increase in insulating vegetation cover and other organic matter. Over time, the active layer -- a layer of soil that freezes in winter and thaws in the summer -- thins. That thinning in turn allows growth of ice wedges and segregated ice. All of this increases elevation and reduces flood frequency, the authors write. The new research is important as the Arctic comes under increasing climate stresses. "With the Arctic becoming wetter and the flood regime changing, we need to understand how riverine landscapes respond to these changes in the rivers and the floods associated with those rivers," Zwieback said.

However, even these power-generating neighbourhoods will remain vulnerable to power outages resulting from natural disasters such as hurricanes, fires or floods. And all of these are likely to become increasingly common due to the effects of climate change. So how will sustainable neighbourhoods cope with the pressures put on their energy systems? Caroline Hachem-Vermette is an associate professor in the Department of Building, Civil and Environmental Engineering at the Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science. In a new paper, she looks at how thoughtful design can reduce a neighbourhood's energy vulnerability during power disruptions, as well as which design characteristics are needed if and when local populations need to move to shelters. The article was published in the journal Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews . In it Hachem-Vermette and co-author Kuljeet Singh from the University of Prince Edward Island analyse the design and energy characteristics of particular kinds of buildings and neighbourhoods to assess their vulnerabilities and their access to alternative and renewable energy sources. The authors use several scenarios involving different lengths of power disruption to see which kind of response is most beneficial to the populations affected. "We focused on the neighbourhood unit level because we can look at characteristics and detail levels that are harder to find at the city level," Hachem-Vermette explains. "Designed to be self-contained in terms of basic conveniences and services, the neighbourhood unit is a fundamental concept in urban planning. Neighborhood units serve as a basis for city-level development and design and can be used to understand various sustainable and resilient strategies." Net-zero but still vulnerable Designed along sustainable practices, the theoretical neighbourhoods were based on the kinds found in typical Canadian municipalities: low-density residential, mixed residential/commercial and retail, high-density residential and mixed high-density residential and industrial. The researchers also assessed the types of energy systems these neighbourhoods primarily relied on to provide electrical and thermal energy. These indicators were considered across scenarios in which power disruptions lasted between one day and over three weeks. They provided reliable estimates regarding energy interruption vulnerability as well as the best measures to be considered to mitigate the effects of these disasters on local populations. The researchers came away from their study with several recommendations that could improve a stricken neighbourhood's resilience. They urged municipal authorities to do the following: equip large buildings such as schools with the means to be self-sufficient in energy production so they could be used as temporary shelters; modify design standards for shelters to increase their maximum population while still providing good indoor air quality, hygienic spaces for living, food preparation and recreation; and incorporate neighbourhood spatial design methods to ensure access to roads, potential shelter buildings and hospitals, and landscapes for energy system installations. Hachem-Vermette realizes much more study is needed as cities move toward fully sustainable practices in the face of increasingly extreme weather. But she is confident that initiatives such as Concordia's PLAN/NET ZERØ and the $123-million dollar Canada First Research Excellence Fund grant announced earlier this year will help her and her fellow researchers find pathways to navigate the societal transition to renewable energy sources. "My research is at the heart of the effort to build neighbourhoods that are decarbonised," she says. "With my background in architecture, urban planning and building engineering, I can pull these disciplines together. Bridging the gaps at the interface of these disciplines is where we will find sustainable and resilient solutions."

Short for NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar, NISAR will help scientists better understand processes involved in natural hazards and catastrophic events, such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and landslides. In addition, it will support monitoring of infrastructure, such as dams, bridges, and roadways. What's more, the satellite's cloud-penetrating ability will help urgent-response communities during weather disasters such as hurricanes, storm surges, and floods. And NISAR will provide key global Earth observations, such as changes in ice sheets, glaciers, and sea ice, as well as improve understanding of how deforestation, permafrost loss, and fires affect the carbon cycle. Along with providing an unprecedented amount of data, the mission breaks new ground with its collaboration between teams of scientists and engineers separated by more than 9,000 miles and 13 time zones. The first-ever hardware collaboration between NASA and ISRO on an Earth-observing mission, NISAR will carry the most advanced radar system ever launched as part of a NASA or ISRO mission. About the length of a pickup truck, the satellite's main body contains engineering systems and a first-of-its-kind dual-radar payload -- an L-band system with a 10-inch (25-centimeter) wavelength and an S-band system with a 4-inch (10-centimeter) wavelength. Each system's signal is sensitive to different sizes of features on Earth's surface, and each specializes in measuring different attributes, such as moisture content, surface roughness, and motion. These characteristics are important for studying a variety of natural surface conditions, such as the amount of soil moisture available for vegetation to thrive or if land has subsided over time. When operating together, the satellite's two radars will collect data synchronized in time and location, extending the sensitivity of the measurements to objects on the surface in a broad range of sizes. For example, S-band data will allow more accurate characterization of shorter plants, such as bushes and shrubs, while L-band data will sense taller vegetation, like trees. The spacecraft will operate in a Sun-synchronous orbit, with its radar antennas pointed in a configuration that will also offer unprecedented coverage of Antarctica. This is crucial for studying the motion, deformation, and melting of the Antarctic ice sheet as it breaks up and deposits fresh water into the ocean.

A powerful earthquake, combined with rising sea levels, could significantly increase flood risks in the Pacific Northwest, impacting thousands of residents and properties in northern California, Oregon, and Washington, according to new Virginia Tech research. A study published this week in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that a major earthquake could cause coastal land to sink up to 6.5 feet, expanding the federally designated 1 percent coastal floodplain, an area with a 1-in-100 chance of flooding each year, by 35 to 116 square miles. "The expansion of the coastal floodplain following a Cascadia subduction zone earthquake has not been previously quantified, and the impacts to land use could significantly increase the timeline to recovery," said researcher Tina Dura, lead author of the study and assistant professor of geosciences in the College of Science. The research shows the most severe effects would hit southern Washington, northern Oregon, and northern California, densely populated areas in the region. Dura's team generated tens of thousands of earthquake models to estimate the potential range of earthquake-driven subsidence -- sinking land -- that can be expected from the next large Cascadia earthquake. Then, using geospatial analysis, the team quantified the earthquake-driven expansion of the 1 percent floodplain at 24 estuaries and communities along the Cascadia subduction zone. Because the timing of the next large earthquake is uncertain, the team modeled the impacts of an earthquake striking today or in 2100, when climate-driven sea-level rise will further amplify the impacts of earthquake-driven subsidence. The study estimates that following an earthquake today, an additional 14,350 residents, 22,500 structures, and 777 miles of roadway would fall within the post-earthquake floodplain, more than doubling flood exposure. Potential flooding would affect five airports; 18 critical facilities, including public schools, hospitals, police stations, and fire stations; eight wastewater treatment plants; one electric substation; and 57 potential contaminant sources, including animal feeding operations, gas stations, and solid waste facilities. By 2100, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) localized relative sea-level rise projections show that sea levels along the Cascadia subduction zone could be up to 3 feet higher than today. This climate-driven sea-level rise will amplify the impacts of future earthquake-driven subsidence, more than tripling the flood exposure of residents, structures, and roads. "Today, and more so in 2100 as background sea levels rise, the immediate effect of earthquake-driven subsidence will be a delay in response and recovery from the earthquake due to compromised assets. Long-term effects could render many coastal communities uninhabitable," said Dura, an affiliate with the Global Change Center. Current low-lying land developed for cattle grazing and farming through diking and draining will experience heavy economic loss as increased tidal inundation will cause over salinization of soils and render them unusable. Additional impacts include erosion of natural systems, particularly coastal estuaries, intertidal wetlands and protective dunes and beaches. These act as buffers against storm surges and help to dissipate wave energy to prevent sediment erosion and protect property damage. According to Dura, the loss of these ecosystems may not be recoverable, and inland movement may be constrained by topography and human development. "The loss of intertidal wetlands directly impacts ecosystem services such as water filtration, habitat for fisheries and shorebirds, and carbon storage capacity," said Dura, an affiliate with the Fralin Life Sciences Institute. "Intertidal wetlands function as natural carbon sinks, and their erosion or conversion to tidal flats significantly reduces their ability to sequester carbon." The Cascadia subduction zone is one of many regions in the "Ring of Fire," where the Pacific Plate meets another tectonic plate, causing the strongest earthquakes in the world and the majority of volcanic eruptions. However, a great earthquake -- those with a seismic magnitude over 8.0 -- has not occurred along the Cascadia subduction zone since Jan. 26, 1700, making coastal geologic records of past earthquakes and associated subsidence critical for understanding this hazard. Dura and her team are documenting geologic evidence of past earthquake-driven subsidence as the Paleoseismology Working Group Lead within the Cascadia Region Earthquake Science Center (CRESCENT), a center at the University of Oregon funded by the National Science Foundation that is providing a collaborative framework to tackle multidisciplinary scientific and societal challenges at the Cascadia subduction zone. Their research of geologic evidence from the last six to seven thousand years indicates that 11 great earthquakes have happened approximately every 200 to 800 years in the Pacific Northwest. The last earthquake in the region resulted in between 1.5 to 6.5 feet of land along the coastline immediately sinking. "Cascadia is a unique place. It's not super heavily populated, but most estuaries have a community in them, and they're all right in the zone of subsidence," said Dura. "This is honestly where I think the subsidence could have bigger impacts than it has during other recent large earthquakes around the world." Global relevance Subduction zones, which can also be found off the coasts of Alaska, Russia, Japan, Indonesia, New Zealand, and South America, are all similar in that one tectonic plate slides beneath another. Along portions of these subduction zones, there is an initial uplift in the top plate. Pressure between the two plates gradually builds over centuries. The resultant earthquake is created when the plate above become unstuck. Offshore, the plate rises, forcing an upward water surge that leads to a tsunami. Onshore, the plate subsides, immediately dropping the coastline up to 6.5 feet. The earthquake shaking begins the process. For a magnitude 9 earthquake or over, that takes about four to six minutes. While the shaking is occurring the land is dropping, and, depending on tidal conditions, low-lying areas may experience immediate flooding. Within 15 to 20 minutes the tsunami hits with further flooding. The entire process takes no longer than 30 minutes, and multiple tsunami waves may occur over one to two hours. However, the sinking of the land will persist for decades to centuries after the earthquake. According to Dura, the 1960 Chile earthquake submerged a pine forest and farms, converting them to tidal marshes, and it flooded coastal towns, forcing residents to abandon their homes; the 1964 Alaska earthquake forced the relocation of communities and airstrips to higher ground; the 2004 Sumatra-Andaman earthquake destroyed waterfront aquaculture and caused coastal erosion; and the 2011 earthquake in Japan caused erosion, disrupted ports, and contributed to a nuclear disaster. "Given the global prevalence of subduction zones, these insights hold relevance beyond Cascadia, informing hazard assessments and mitigation strategies for tectonically active regions worldwide," Dura said.

In modern construction projects, ground improvement through grouting is commonly used to ensure structural stability and safety. This technique, which involves injecting stabilizing materials into the soil, is essential for buildings in earthquake-prone regions and areas with adverse ground conditions. From securing foundations and preventing soil erosion to strengthening underground structures, grouting plays a vital role in creating a resilient infrastructure capable of withstanding environmental stresses and geological challenges. However, traditional grouting methods have long posed significant environmental challenges. The construction industry's heavy reliance on silica-based chemical grouts, produced through energy-intensive processes, contributes substantially to global carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions. With growing pressure to reduce its environmental impact, developing sustainable alternatives to conventional grouting materials has become a critical priority for scientists and engineers worldwide. Against this backdrop, a research team from the Shibaura Institute of Technology, Japan, has developed an innovative solution that could revolutionize ground improvement through grouting. Led by Professor Shinya Inazumi of the College of Engineering, the research team developed a novel carbon-neutral grout called Colloidal Silica Recovered from Geothermal Fluids (CSRGF), that enhances soil stabilization while simultaneously reducing the environmental impact of construction and geothermal energy harvesting. Their study was made available online on January 22, 2025, and will be published in Volume 22 of Case Studies in Construction Materials in July 2025. "Geothermal energy production generates large amounts of silica-rich waste fluids, which traditionally pose maintenance and disposal challenges," explains Inazumi, "By repurposing this waste into a high-performance CSRGF grout, we aimed to establish a circular economy approach, transforming an industrial byproduct into a valuable construction material." In doing so, the newly developed grout addresses two major issues -- preventing high-silica-content waste fluids from damaging geothermal energy harvesting equipment and minimizing the carbon footprint of conventional grout production. Extensive laboratory tests demonstrated the grout's remarkable performance, showing a 50% increase in liquefaction resistance compared to existing materials. Its low viscosity and controlled gelling time allow deep soil penetration while meeting environmental safety standards. These properties make CSRGF grout particularly valuable in earthquake-prone regions, where soil stabilization is crucial for preventing structural damage during seismic events. Notably, the applications for CSRGF grout extend beyond earthquake protection. Its superior water-sealing properties make it ideal for underground construction projects, including tunnels, subways, and basements, where water infiltration threatens structural integrity. Additionally, in coastal and flood-prone areas, CSRGF grout can reinforce soil to combat erosion and mitigate risks associated with rising sea levels. The development of CSRGF grout marks a significant milestone in the construction industry's journey toward carbon neutrality. By repurposing industrial byproducts and reducing waste, this innovation demonstrates how circular economy principles can drive more sustainable construction practices. Moreover, its cost-effective and scalable production reduces CO 2 emissions in construction. Its adoption aligns with international sustainability initiatives, setting new industry standards for environmentally responsible soil stabilization. "By replacing traditional silica-based grouts with our sustainable alternative, the construction industry can advance toward a greener infrastructure development, supporting global efforts to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050," says Inazumi. The research team's next steps include scaling up production and conducting field trials to further validate the material's performance under real-world conditions. As the construction sector strives to balance sustainability with high performance, this innovation showcases the power of innovative thinking in solving engineering challenges sustainably.

Once a rare occurrence, building collapses in Alexandria -- one of the world's oldest cities, often called the "bride of the Mediterranean" for its beauty -- have accelerated from approximately one per year to an alarming 40 per year over the past decade, the researchers found. "The true cost of this loss extends far beyond bricks and mortar. We are witnessing the gradual disappearance of historic coastal cities, with Alexandria sounding the alarm. What once seemed like distant climate risks are now a present reality," said Essam Heggy, a water scientist at the USC Viterbi School of Engineering and the study's corresponding author. "For centuries, Alexandria's structures stood as marvels of resilient engineering, enduring earthquakes, storm surges, tsunamis and more. But now, rising seas and intensifying storms -- fueled by climate change -- are undoing in decades what took millennia of human ingenuity to create," said Sara Fouad, a landscape architect at the Technical University of Munich (TUM) and the study's first author. Coastal erosion: Sinking cities and rising seas Even small sea level increases -- just a few centimeters -- can have devastating effects, Heggy said, threatening even cities as historically resilient as Alexandria, which has withstood centuries of earthquakes, invasions and fires, and even a modern metropolis like Los Angeles, where flash floods and mudslides are now complicating recovery from the recent wildfires. Published in Earth's Future , an AGU journal, the study coincides with troubling findings from NASA and NOAA showing that parts of California -- including the San Francisco Bay Area, Central Valley and coastal Southern California -- are sinking. These minor elevation changes can significantly heighten flood risks and saltwater intrusion, scientists warn. Like Alexandria, California's coastal cities face growing threats from saltwater intrusion, which weakens infrastructure, degrades water supplies and drives up the cost of living. "Our study challenges the common misconception that we'll only need to worry when sea levels rise by a meter," Heggy said. "However, what we're showing here is that coastlines globally, especially Mediterranean coastlines similar to California's, are already changing and causing building collapses at an unprecedented rate." Tracking coastal erosion in Alexandria, Egypt The researchers used a three-pronged approach to assess the impact of shoreline changes on Alexandria's buildings. First, they created a detailed digital map using geographic information system technology to identify the locations of collapsed buildings across six districts of the city's historic urban area, one of its most densely populated regions. The map catalogs key details about each structure, including its location, size, construction materials, age, foundation depth and number of floors. The data, collected from site visits, government reports, news archives and statements from private construction companies, spans 2001 to 2021 and includes both fully and partially collapsed buildings. Next, they combined satellite imagery with historical maps from 1887, 1959 and 2001 to track shoreline movement and gain a deeper understanding of how parts of Alexandria's 50-mile coastline have moved tens of meters inland over the past two decades. By calculating the rate of shoreline retreat over the past century, the researchers studied how the shrinking coastline is raising groundwater levels, bringing them into contact with the foundations of coastal buildings. Finally, the team analyzed chemical "fingerprints" known as isotopes in soil samples to examine the effects of seawater intrusion. They measured specific isotopes, like B7, in each sample to assess the soil's mechanical properties. Higher B7 levels indicate stronger, more stable soil, while lower levels suggest erosion. "Our isotope analysis revealed that buildings are collapsing from the bottom up, as seawater intrusion erodes foundations and weakens the soil. It isn't the buildings themselves, but the ground underneath them that's being affected," said Ibrahim H. Saleh, a soil radiation scientist at Alexandria University and one of the study's co-authors. Developing waterways helps the city handle climate extremes and connects people to well-maintained urban spaces, linking the inner city to the coast. The strategy for future coastal resilience in Alexandria includes maintaining, enhancing or restoring a green belt along the coastline. (Illustrations/Courtesy of Essam Heggy and Sara Elsayed) "Our study demonstrates that coastal buildings are at risk of collapsing even without directly encroaching on the seawater as widely believed," Heggy added. A nature-based solution to protect coastal cities To combat coastal erosion and seawater intrusion, the researchers propose a nature-based solution: creating sand dunes and vegetation barriers along the coastline to block encroaching seawater and hence preventing seawater intrusion from pushing up groundwater levels to building foundations. This sustainable, cost-effective approach can be applied in many coastal densely urbanized regions globally, said Steffen Nijhuis, a landscape-based urbanist from Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands and study co-author. "Preserving the diverse architectural attributes of Mediterranean historic cities is a powerful reminder of how landscape transformation has played a crucial role in creating climate-resilient societies," said Udo Weilacher, landscape architect at TUM and study co-author. "Historic cities like Alexandria, which represent the cradle of cultural exchange, innovation and history, are crucial for safeguarding our shared human heritage," Heggy said. "As climate change accelerates sea level rise and coastal erosion, protecting them isn't just about saving buildings; it's about preserving who we are." About the study: Co-authors of the study include Sara S. Fouad and Udo Weilacher of the Technical University of Munich in Germany; Oula Amrouni and Abderraouf Hzami of the National Institute of Marine Sciences and Technologies at the University of Carthage in Tunisia; Steffen Nijhuis of Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands; Nesma Mohamed and Ibrahim H. Saleh of the Institute of Graduate Studies and Research at Alexandria University in Egypt; Seifeddine Jomaa of the Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research -- UFZ in Magdeburg, Germany; and Yasser Elsheshtawy of the School of Architecture, Planning and Preservation at Columbia University. This research was funded by the Zumberge Research and Innovation Fund of the University of Southern California, which is allocated to the Arid Climates and Water Research Center (AWARE). Part of this work was also funded by the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and the Technical University of Munich.

This study was led by Assistant Professor of Geological Sciences Emma MacKie, Ph.D., and Assistant Professor of Geography Katy Serafin, Ph.D., along with a collaborator at the Colorado School of Mines. "Our results suggest that the primary threat to our ice shelves is 'death by a thousand cuts' via small calving events, rather than catastrophic extremes," said MacKie. Calving, when chunks of ice break off from ice shelves to form icebergs, is common and increasingly influenced by climate change. For extremely large icebergs, this process is typically slow, often starting with small rifts that spread across the ice shelf before fully breaking off. These rifts can be detected as they form and grow using satellite data, but their random nature and the risks associated with sending scientists to observe them in-person make it extremely difficult to predict when future rifts or calving events may occur. Major calving events are particularly challenging to study. While smaller calving events occur frequently, large events -- where over 100 square kilometers of ice break away -- are exceptionally rare. This study is the first of its kind to focus on these large calving events. Even with 47 years' worth of satellite data from 1976 to 2023, the team was still faced with a small sample size. This challenge was addressed with extreme value theory, a type of statistical analysis used when studying rare natural disasters like major earthquakes, extreme floods, or volcanic eruptions. As an expert on extreme flooding, Serafin was no stranger to this type of data analysis. "Statistical models relating event size and frequency are tools that have been used for estimating rare flood events, like a 100-year flood, for decades," said Serafin. "Now that satellite imagery can more consistently track large calving events, we thought we'd test whether we could apply the same tools for understanding how likely these massive calving events are." Using this method, the team analyzed extreme calving events found in the satellite record and developed a model to predict the likelihood of these events over time. While creating their models, researchers also developed scenarios to predict how large calving events could be. By their estimates, a once in a decade iceberg could be as large as 6,100 square kilometers, only slightly larger than an extreme calving event in 2017, when an iceberg roughly the size of Delaware broke off the Antarctic ice sheet. A once in a century eventcould produce an iceberg about 45,000 square kilometers, slightly larger than the entire country of Denmark. "A once in a century iceberg would be several times larger than any in the observational record and would have a significant impact on ice-sheet stability and ocean processes," said MacKie. The team found no evidence that large icebergs have increased in size over the last half century, with the peak iceberg surface areas occurring between 1986 and 2000. This indicates that extreme calving events do not correlate with climate change, although overall ice shelf loss has increased due to climate change. While extreme calving events continue to be rare and may be part of a larger natural cycle, more numerous small calving events have dominated Antarctic ice shelf loss over the last half century.

But what if these atomic applications could be lifted from their current confines in labs and on benchtops? This advancement is at the heart of the effort at UC Santa Barbara engineering professor Daniel Blumenthal's lab, where his team seeks to recreate the performance of these lasers on lightweight devices that can fit in the palm of your hand. "These smaller lasers will enable scalable laser solutions for actual quantum systems, as well as lasers for portable, field-deployable and space-based quantum sensors," said Andrei Isichenko, a graduate student researcher in Blumenthal's lab. "This will impact technology spaces such as quantum computing with neutral atoms and trapped ions and also cold atom quantum sensors such as atomic clocks and gravimeters." In a paper in the journal Scientific Reports , Blumenthal, Isichenko and team present a development in this direction with a chip-scale ultra-low-linewidth self-injection locked 780 nm laser. This roughly matchbox-sized device, say the researchers, can perform better than current, narrow-linewidth 780 nm lasers, for a fraction of the cost to manufacture, and the space to hold them. Lassoing the Laser The atom motivating the laser development is rubidium, so chosen because of well-known properties that make it ideal for a variety of high-precision applications. The stability of its D2 optical transition lends the atom well to atomic clocks; the atom's sensitivity also makes it a popular choice for sensors and cold atom physics. By passing a laser through a vapor of rubidium atoms as the atomic reference, a near infrared laser can take on the characteristic of the stable atomic transition. "You can use the atomic transition lines to lasso the laser," noted Blumenthal, the paper's senior author. "In other words, by locking the laser to the atomic transition line, the laser more or less takes on the characteristics of that atomic transition in terms of stability." But a fancy red light does not a precision laser make. For a light of the desired quality, "noise" must be removed. Blumenthal describes this as a tuning fork versus guitar strings. "If you have a tuning fork and hit a C note, it's probably a pretty perfect C," he explained. "But if you strum a C on a guitar, you can hear other tones in there." Similarly, lasers may incorporate different frequencies (colors) that generate extra "tones." To create the desired single frequency -- pure deep-red light in this case -- tabletop systems incorporate additional components to further calm down the laser light. The challenge for the researchers was to integrate all that functionality and performance onto a chip. The team used a combination of a commercially available Fabry-Perot laser diode, some of the world's lowest-loss waveguides (fabricated in Blumenthal's lab); as well as highest quality factor resonators, all fabricated in a silicon nitride platform. By doing so, they were able to duplicate the performance of bulky, tabletop systems -- and their device, according to their tests, can outperform some tabletop lasers as well as previously reported integrated lasers by four orders of magnitude in key metrics such as frequency noise and linewidth . "The significance of the low linewidth values is that we can achieve a compact laser without sacrificing laser performance," Isichenko explained. "In some ways the performance is improved compared to conventional lasers because of full chip-scale integration. These linewidths help us better interact with atomic systems, eliminating contributions from the laser noise to fully resolve the atomic signal in response to, for example, the environment they are sensing." Low linewidths -- in terms of this project a record-low sub-Hz fundamental and a sub-KHz integral -- are indicative of the laser technology's stability and ability to overcome noise from both external and internal sources. Further benefits of this technology include the cost -- it uses a $50 diode, and employs a cost-effective and scalable fabrication process that is created using a CMOS compatible wafer scale process that draws from the electronic chip fabrication world. The success of this technology means that it will be possible to deploy these high-performance, precision, low-cost photonics integrated lasers in a variety of situations in and out of the lab, including quantum experiments, atomic timekeeping and the sensing of the faintest of signals, such as the shifts of gravitational acceleration around the Earth. "You can put these on satellites to make a gravitational map of the Earth and around the Earth with a certain amount of precision," Blumenthal said. "You could measure sea level rise, changes in sea ice and earthquakes by sensing the gravitational fields around the Earth." The compactness, low-power consumption and light weight is a "perfect fit," he added, for technology to be deployed in space.

Led by James "Jake" Gearon, a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences (EAS) within the College of Arts and Sciences at Indiana University Bloomington, the research team has outlined for the first time the conditions that create river avulsions. Co-authors include Harrison Martin (Ph.D. EAS '23), a post-doctoral fellow now at CalTech, Clarke DeLisle (Ph.D. EAS '23) now at EVS, Inc, Eric Barefoot, a post-doctoral researcher at IU Bloomington and now a faculty member at UC-Riverside, and Professor Douglas Edmonds, the Malcolm and Sylvia Boyce Chair in Geological Sciences in the Earth and Atmospheric Sciences department. Using advanced satellite technology, the team mapped how certain landscape features make avulsions more likely. "Measuring topography around a river is difficult and time-consuming because of the dense vegetation," said Gearon. "We took advantage of a new satellite that uses lasers to measure topography." This technology, called lidar, penetrates vegetation to find bare-earth elevations, allowing for accurate topographical measurements. The study presents a novel framework for predicting when avulsions will occur, a problem humanity has dealt with for millennia. "Avulsions which are possibly the inspirations for ancient flood myths, have created the largest floods in human history, and continue to threaten millions of people today," explained Edmonds. "As climate change alters global water cycles and human expansion into flood-prone areas increases, understanding and predicting avulsions has never been more critical." What Causes River Avulsions? Avulsions occur when a river's water rises above the surrounding landscape, often due to the buildup of sediment in the riverbed. When this happens, the river may spill over its banks and carve a new path across the floodplain. This can lead to severe flooding, as the entire river rushes through areas not typically designed to handle such volume. For example, the 2008 avulsion of the Kosi River in Northern India directly affected over 30 million residents, killed hundreds of people, and caused over $1 billion dollars in damage. Traditionally, scientists believed avulsions happened due to two main factors: either the riverbed became elevated above the floodplain, or the land on either side of the river offered a steeper, more appealing path for the water to follow. "We can now actually test these two 80-year-old ideas with the topography data we have collected from space" said Edmonds, "and we were surprised to find that both factors work together and play different roles depending on the river's location." Predicting avulsion hazards -- A new way to map flood risks Researchers analyzed data from 174 river avulsions around the world, using satellite imagery to track river movements over the past several decades. The study authors reveal that avulsions are much more common near mountain ranges and coastal areas than in the middle sections of rivers. They discovered that 74 percent of these avulsions occurred near mountain fronts or coastlines, areas where sediment tends to build up quickly. Further, using topographic data, the researchers developed a new model to map what they term "avulsion corridors" -- paths that rivers might take if they break from their current course. This tool could help governments and planners identify areas at high risk for sudden flooding, especially in regions with limited flood management resources. The study also highlights the importance of considering avulsions in flood hazard assessments, something that current flood models don't usually account for. "Traditional flood models focus on rising water levels from heavy rains, but avulsions can occur without warning, even in areas where rainfall isn't a major concern. This makes them particularly dangerous and difficult to predict, much like earthquakes" said Gearon. Implications for the Global South The findings could be especially valuable in the Global South -- less developed parts of Africa, Latin America, and Asia -- where avulsions are more frequent and often more deadly. In many of these regions, a combination of geological factors and infrastructure challenges makes communities more vulnerable to sudden river changes. The 2010 avulsion-related flooding on the Indus River in Pakistan, for example, affected over 20 million people. The new model, which relies on minimal data, could help countries prepare for avulsion-related disasters, potentially saving lives and reducing economic damage. By offering scientists, policy makers, and practitioners a new way to think about and plan for flood risks -- and as climate change continues to reshape weather patterns and increase flood hazards worldwide -- the study provides essential tools for understanding and mitigating the dangers posed by river avulsions.

A new study published today in Science provides the stunning solution: In an East Greenland fjord, a mountaintop collapsed into the sea and triggered a mega-tsunami about 200 meters (650 feet) tall. The giant wave rocked back and forth inside the narrow fjord for nine days, generating the seismic waves that reverberated through Earth's crust, baffling scientists around the world. This rhythmic sloshing is a phenomenon known as a seiche. Fortunately, no people were hurt, but the waves destroyed some $200,000 in infrastructure at an unoccupied research station on Ella Island. "When we set out on this scientific adventure, everybody was puzzled and no one had the faintest idea what caused this signal," said Kristian Svennevig, a geologist at the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland (GEUS) and the study's lead author. "All we knew was that it was somehow associated with the landslide. We only managed to solve this enigma through a huge interdisciplinary and international effort." Climate change set the stage for the landslide by melting the glacier at the base of the mountain, destabilizing the more than 25 million cubic meters (33 million cubic yards) of rock and ice -- enough to fill 10,000 Olympic-sized swimming pools -- that ultimately crashed into the sea. As climate change continues to melt Earth's polar regions it could lead to an increase in large, destructive landslides such as this one. "Climate change is shifting what is typical on Earth, and it can set unusual events into motion," said Gabriel, whose work on this study was supported by the European Research Council, Horizon Europe, the National Science Foundation (NSF) and NASA. When seismic monitoring networks first detected this signal in September 2023, it was puzzling for two main reasons. First, the signal looked nothing like the busy squiggle that earthquakes produce on seismographs. Instead, it oscillated with a 92-second-interval between its peaks, too slow for humans to perceive. Second, the signal stayed strong for days on end, where more common seismic events weaken more rapidly. The global community of Earth scientists started buzzing with online discussion of what could be causing the strange seismic waves. The discussion turned up reports of a huge landslide in a remote Greenland fjord that occurred on Sept. 16, around the time the seismic signal was first detected. To figure out if and how these two phenomena might be connected, the team, led by Kristian Svennevig of the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland, combined seismic recordings from around the world, field measurements, satellite imagery and computer simulations to reconstruct the extraordinary events. The team, comprised of 68 scientists from 41 research institutions, analyzed satellite and on-the-ground imagery to document the enormous volume of rock and ice in the landslide that triggered the tsunami. They also analyzed the seismic waves to model the dynamics and trajectory of the rock-ice avalanche as it moved down the glacial gully and into the fjord. To understand the tsunami and resulting seiche, the researchers used supercomputers to create high-resolution simulations of the events. "It was a big challenge to do an accurate computer simulation of such a long-lasting, sloshing tsunami," said Gabriel. Ultimately, these simulations were able to closely match the real-world tsunami's height as well as the long-lasting seiche's slow oscillations. By integrating these diverse data sources, the researchers determined that the nine-day seismic signal was caused by the massive landslide and resulting seiche within Greenland's Dickson Fjord. "It was exciting to be working on such a puzzling problem with an interdisciplinary and international team of scientists," said Robert Anthony, a geophysicist with the United States Geological Survey's Earthquake Hazards program and co-author of the study. "Ultimately, it took a plethora of geophysical observations and numerical modeling from researchers across many countries to put the puzzle together and get a complete picture of what had occurred." The study's findings demonstrate the complex, cascading hazards posed by climate change in polar regions. While no people were in the area when the landslide and mega-tsunami occurred, the fjord is close to a route commonly used by cruise ships, highlighting the need to monitor polar regions as climate change accelerates. For example, a landslide in western Greenland's Karrat Fjord in 2017 triggered a tsunami that flooded the village of Nuugaatsiaq, destroying 11 houses and killing four people. Gabriel said the results could also inspire researchers to comb back through the seismic record to look for similar events now that scientists know what to look for. Finding more seiches could help more clearly define the conditions that give rise to the phenomenon. "This shows there is stuff out there that we still don't understand and haven't seen before," said Ebeling, who co-authored the study with support from NSF and helped manage a network of seismic sensors that detected the seiche's vibrations. "The essence of science is trying to answer a question we don't know the answer to -- that's why this was so exciting to work on." YouTube Video: Seismic & tsunami waves from the September 2023, Dickson Fjord, Greenland landslide & fjord seiche

The event created a week-long oscillating wave in Dickson Fjord, according to a new report in The Seismic Record . Angela Carrillo-Ponce of GFZ German Research Centre for Geoscience and her colleagues identified two distinct signals in the seismic data from the event: one high-energy signal caused by the massive rockslide that generated the tsunami, and one very long-period (VLP) signal that lasted over a week. Their analysis of the VLP signal -- which was detected as far as 5000 kilometers away -- suggests that the landslide and resulting tsunami created a seiche, or a standing wave that oscillates in a body of water. In this case, the seiche was churning for days between the shores of Dickson Fjord. "The fact that the signal of a rockslide-triggered sloshing wave in a remote area of Greenland can be observed worldwide and for over a week is exciting, and as seismologists this signal was what mostly caught our attention," said Carrillo-Ponce. "The analysis of the seismic signal can give us some answers regarding the processes involved and may even lead to improved monitoring of similar events in the future. If we had not studied this event seismically, then we would not have known about the seiche produced in the fjord system," she added. The findings will help researchers as they study the impacts of landslides in Greenland and similar regions around the world where global warming and the loss of permafrost are making rocky slopes and glaciers increasingly unstable. In western Greenland, recent tsunamis have had devastating consequences, such as the 2017 Karrat Fjord event where an avalanche caused a tsunami that flooded the village of Nuugaatsiaq and killed four people. Megatsunamis over 100 meters high off the east coast of Greenland have also reached Europe. The 16 September 2023 megatsunami took place in Dickson Fjord in a remote part of East Greenland, and was first noted in social media posts and in a report of waves hitting a military installation on Ella Island. Carrillo-Ponce and colleagues studied both seismic signals and satellite imagery from the area to precisely locate and reconstruct the series of events. Their analysis of an initial high-energy seismic signal, combined with satellite images of a missing rock patch along a cliff along Dickson Fjord, allowed them to trace the direction of the landslide as it picked up glacier ice and became a mixed rock-ice avalanche before it reached the water. The resulting megatsunami run-up was more than 200 meters near the water entry point and an average of 60 meters along a 10-kilometer stretch of the fjord. "While we were able to obtain information on the direction and magnitude of the force exerted by the landslide, we do not have data to investigate the original cause of the landslide," Carrillo-Ponce said. The strength, radiation pattern and duration of the later seismic VLP signal best fit a scenario where the tsunami created a long-lasting seiche in the fjord, the researchers found. VLP signals have been observed previously in Greenland, but they are usually associated with iceberg collapse due to glacial earthquakes. "In our case we observed a VLP signal too, but the main difference is the long duration," Carrillo-Ponce explained. "It is quite impressive to see that we could use good-quality data from stations located as far as Germany, Alaska and North America, and that those records were strong enough for at least one week." The researchers say their approach might prove useful in studying similar past events, and their possible link to climate and environmental change. "We have compared our results with remote sensing data to validate our solutions, and our study shows that the force produced by the signals is well resolved," Carrillo-Ponce said. "Therefore it becomes a useful analysis as seismic signals contain information on the type of source generating the signal and how the energy is radiated."

In the Ishikawa, Toyama, and Niigata prefectures, 1.3-5.8-meter-high tsunamis were confirmed. The tsunamis that hit Iida Bay, located near the epicenter of the earthquake, were significantly higher and stronger than those that hit other coasts. Tsunamis over three meters high were concentrated primarily in Iida Bay, with the area surrounding Ukai Fishing Port being most widely flooded by the tsunami. Aerial photos and field surveys revealed that this area was flooded up to approximately 500 meters inland from the coast. Moreover, some sections of the breakwater at Iida Port collapsed, suggesting that this tsunami event was concentrated and amplified through unique mechanisms. To unveil these mechanisms, a team of researchers from Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan, led by Professor Hiroshi Takagi from the School of Environment and Society investigated the source of the amplification of 2024 Noto Peninsula tsunamis. "To protect against unusual tsunamis like those that occurred in the 2024 Noto Peninsula earthquake, advanced countermeasures are required. Understanding the special mechanisms that lead to the concentration of these tsunamis is therefore of utmost importance," says Takagi, when asked about the motivation behind their study. Their study was published in the journal Ocean Engineering on 19 May 2024. The team conducted a detailed investigation into the behaviour and characteristics of the tsunamis in Iida Bay using a field survey, numerical analysis, and video recordings from a monitoring camera. Their analysis revealed two main reasons for the amplification of the tsunamis. First, the tsunami energies converged off the coast of Iida Bay due to a lens effect. In Iida Spur, an area with waters shallower than 300 meters spreading like a tongue off the coast of Iida Bay, slow-moving tsunamis hit while retaining their energy without significant dissipation. In addition, wave refraction occurred due to the steep slope at the boundary between Iida Spur and Toyama Trough, concentrating the energy and creating the lens effect. These effects contributed to the particularly high tsunamis in Iida Bay. Second, after reaching the bay, the first tsunami caused diffraction at the two capes and multiple reflections, triggering multiple short-period secondary tsunamis that overlapped at Iida Port and Ukai Fishing Port, causing significant damage. Video recordings overlooking Iida Port revealed that the first wave arrived around 20 minutes after the earthquake, followed by a second wave 10 minutes later. Wavelet analysis showed that the primary tsunami wave had a period of 5-10 minutes, while the secondary waves had periods of less than two minutes. Furthermore, the video recordings showed that a bore-like tsunami propagating along the coast intersected a tsunami directly reaching Iida Port, which hit the breakwater, resulting in a 10-meter-high splash. "Our study highlights that the damage due to tsunamis in Iida Bay was greatly influenced by local conditions, including ocean floor topology, coastline shape, the location of coastal facilities, and the fundamental seismic factors of the earthquake. These findings suggest that multiple tsunamis can overlap energetically within a bay, requiring more precise tsunami prediction technologies and specific countermeasures to mitigate such localized damage against similar future events," remarks Takagi.

To address this, researchers led by Professor Hiroshi Takagi from Tokyo Institute of Technology have proposed a self-powered movable seawall system (SMS) that uses microtidal energy to operate the gates. The proposed system, whose details have been published online in the journal Renewable Energy on 6 November 2023, consists of gates placed at the port entrance designed to close during periods of port inactivity such as nighttime or holiday seasons. When raised, the differences in water levels between the inside and outside of the port are used to generate electricity, which is then stored and utilized for subsequent gate operations. "To our knowledge, there is yet no system in the world that uses movable seawalls to generate electricity and then uses that electricity to operate the system itself. In this sense, SMS is a completely new concept," says Prof. Takagi. Despite Japan's extensive coastline, the tidal ranges -- representing the height difference between high and low tides -- are considered too small for large-scale tidal power generation. In contrast, the SMS system harnesses microtidal amplitudes in the sea level, which ranges from 10 cm to 150 cm during spring tides. The system consists of a series of gates with a 30 cm gap that aims to operate the adjacent gates smoothly without interaction and small turbines for power generation housed within the gap. Turbines, with one propeller per 50 cm interval vertically, are placed in the gaps between the gates. The researchers tested the system's feasibility in Japanese ports, where it operates for eight hours a day, to determine if it can generate enough electricity to restore the gates under the seafloor after the tsunami alert was lifted, considering a buoyant force of floating gate. Out of 56 assessed ports across Japan, nine locations were highly feasible, 14 feasible, and 33 unfeasible due to small potential of energy generation. However, 20 feasible locations were identified along Japan's western coast, facing the Nankai Trough -- a subduction zone known as the source of megathrust earthquakes that occur every century or two. These seismic events have the potential to trigger tsunamis, making the proposed SMS system a promising protective measure for vulnerable ports and their hinterlands. Furthermore, the researchers identified specific ports, including Himeji and Fukuyama, as examples of favorable locations for generating surplus energy which can be stored for later use. These areas, located in the Seto Inland Sea, serve as major industrial hubs with steel industries, shipbuilding, chemical plants, and various factories. Apart from protecting these critical infrastructures against tsunamis, the proposed system can also provide emergency power to enhance the resilience of these industries in the face of disasters. It integrates disaster prevention with the utilization of renewable energy. "Our findings outline a synergistic system between disaster prevention and the use of renewable energy," says Prof. Takagi. While acknowledging challenges such as technical hurdles and restrictions by related laws and regulations, the researchers envision the SMS system as a global safeguard for ports against natural disasters, rising sea levels, and extreme weather, including coastal floods. Prof. Takagi concludes: "If the technology of the proposed movable tsunami barrier, under the harsh disaster conditions in Japan, can be firmly established through this research, there is no doubt that a day will come when this technology can be exported and deployed overseas as a groundbreaking disaster prevention technology."

The Cantor's Giant Softshell Turtle ( Pelochelys cantorii ) is native to the rivers of South and Southeast Asia. Known for its rarity and secretive nature, this species has long been a subject of fascination and concern among conservationists. Habitat destruction has made it disappear from much of its environment. They are also heavily harvested by locals for meat and are often killed by fishermen when caught in fishing gear. Currently, the freshwater turtle is classified as Critically Endangered (CR) on the International Union for Conservation of Nature's (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species, and its numbers today are decreasing. To uncover the whereabouts of the species, a team of conservationists turned to those who live in and share their habitat, and this journey took them to the verdant banks of the Chandragiri River in Kerala. By talking to local villagers, the group were able to systematically document sightings of the turtle and engaged communities in conservation efforts. This work led to the first documentation of a female nesting, and the rescue of eggs from flooded nests. The hatchlings were later released into the river. The study, published in the journal Oryx , was led by conservationists from the University of Portsmouth and Zoological Society of London in England, University of Miami, Museum of Zoology at the Senckenberg Society for Nature Research in Germany, Florida Museum of Natural History in the USA, and Wildlife Institute of India. Corresponding author, Dr Francoise Cabada-Blanco from the School of Biological Sciences at the University of Portsmouth, said: "For years, the Cantor turtle's existence has barely been a murmur against the backdrop of India's bustling biodiversity, with sightings so scarce that the turtle's very presence seemed like a ghost from the past. "Following several unsuccessful attempts at tracking one down using conventional ecological survey methods, we took a different approach by tapping into local knowledge. "The team, led by Ayushi Jain were able to engage the community really effectively, so much so that they shared tales of historical sightings, provided leads on current occurrences, and even aided in the live release of individuals accidentally caught as by-catch." Ayushi's team is now working on setting up a community hatchery and nursery. Ayushi Jain, from the Zoological Society of London's Edge of Existence Programme, added: "Through household interviews and the establishment of a local alert network, we did not just listen; we learned." "The community's willingness to engage formed the backbone of our project, allowing us to record not just fleeting glimpses of the turtles but evidence of a reproductive population -- a discovery that rewrites the narrative of a species thought to be vanishing from India's waters." The paper says the implications of the findings underscore the invaluable role of local knowledge in conservation science -- a tool as critical as any satellite tag or camera trap in the quest to understand and protect our planet's biodiversity. The establishment of the alert network represents a pioneering approach in the area, where community involvement leads to real-time insights and immediate action, paving the way for a more responsive and inclusive model of wildlife conservation in Kerala. "Uniting traditional wisdom with scientific inquiry can certainly illuminate the path forward for the conservation of the Cantor's Giant Softshell Turtle," added Dr Cabada-Blanco. "Our study is a narrative of rediscovery, of finding hope in the stories told by the river and its people, and of laying the groundwork for a future where this magnificent species can thrive, not just survive."

Now, researchers at the University of Missouri's College of Arts and Science are collaborating with geologist Gordon Baird to reanalyze his massive fossil collection from Mazon Creek -- currently housed at the Field Museum in Chicago -- which includes 300,000 siderite concretions from around 350 different localities. The Mazon Creek fossil beds are renowned for their exceptional preservation of both plants and animals, made possible by their unique geological setting. The fossils are encased in siderite -- an iron carbonate mineral -- forming abundant concretions that have become a treasure trove for scientists and avocational fossil hunters alike. Thanks to decades of research at Mazon Creek, including foundational fieldwork by Baird and colleagues in the late 1970s, we now have an extraordinary view of life along that ancient coast. A snapshot of ancient life Baird's original work at the Mazon Creek fossil site helped distinguish two major faunal assemblages, or groups of animal remains. These assemblages helped scientists understand the ancient environments where the fossils originated. They were a marine assemblage comprised of life in offshore coastal waters, and a mixed assemblage from a river delta along the shoreline, where freshwater organisms and washed-in terrestrial plants and animals were preserved together. Now, Mizzou's team has confirmed a slightly more nuanced view of Baird's original findings, using modern data analysis techniques coupled with advanced imaging at Mizzou's X-ray Microanalysis Core. "We found three readily identifiable paleoenvironments, including the unique characteristics of a benthic marine assemblage representing a transitional habitat between the nearshore and offshore zones," said Jim Schiffbauer, Marie M. and Harry L. Smith Endowed Professor of Geological Sciences. "These ancient environments were each dominated by specific groups of animals, for example freshwater animals nearest to shore, jellyfish and sea anemones further offshore, and marine clams and worms in the transitional zone." The fossils formed during a phase of sea-level rise and flooding of what used to be large coal swamps. "The different environments affected how quickly and deeply organisms were buried, and in what specific geochemical conditions fossilization may have started," Schiffbauer said. "That, in turn, shaped where certain microbes lived and helped form the minerals that make up the concretions surrounding these fossils today." Next steps In current and future research, Schiffbauer and Baird are using this information to create a sedimentological model to show how the Mazon Creek ecosystem connects to the Colchester coal layers below -- where coal mining led to the fossil site's original discovery. "Given that multiple episodes of rapid coastal drowning events occurred in the U.S. midcontinent during the Carboniferous Period, refinement of information from the Mazon Creek locality will lead to a deeper understanding of similar deposits in other coal basins," said Baird, who is now an emeritus professor at State University of New York at Fredonia. Mizzou's new collaborative analysis with Baird, colleagues from the private sector and the University of Toronto is the most comprehensive and data-driven picture of what Mazon Creek's ancient ecosystem looked like long ago. This knowledge contributes significantly to our understanding of the Carboniferous Period's biodiversity and paleoecology. "It offers a real snapshot of the incredible diversity present in the late Carboniferous Period and allows for inferences about the complexity of food chains and how this ecosystem functioned," Schiffbauer said. "Now, we have an unparalleled and statistically supported look at the interconnected terrestrial, estuarine and marine life of the Carboniferous Period." The study, "283,821 concretions, how do you measure the Mazon Creek? Assessing the paleoenvironmental and taphonomic nature of the Braidwood and Essex assemblages," was published in the journal Paleobiology . Other co-authors are John Warren Huntley and Tara Selly at Mizzou; Charles Chabica at Northeastern Illinois University; Marc Laflamme at University of Toronto Mississauga; and A. Drew Muscente at Princeton Consultants, Inc.

The research, published in Nature Geoscience , isbased on nearly two decades of satellite data from 2001 to 2020 and is the first study to demonstrate global-scale patterns in how El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) influences mangrove growth and degradation. Previously, impacts had only been documented at individual sites, such as a dramatic die-off in northern Australia in 2015 when more than 40 million mangrove trees perished along a 1,200-mile stretch of coastline. "We wanted to know whether these events were isolated or part of a broader pattern," said lead author Zhen Zhang, a postdoctoral scholar at Tulane School of Science and Engineering. "Our findings confirm that ENSO has large-scale, recurring effects on mangrove ecosystems around the world." El Niño is a climate pattern of Pacific Ocean temperature and wind shifts that affect global weather. El Niño brings warm waters to the eastern Pacific; La Niña brings cool waters there. These changes disrupt rainfall, storms, and temperatures worldwide -- causing floods, droughts, and shifts in hurricane activity. El Niño is known for triggering coral bleaching, droughts, wildfires, and now, researchers have confirmed it also plays a major role in mangrove health. The study identified a striking "seesaw" effect: During El Niño events, mangroves in the Western Pacific experience widespread degradation, while those in the Eastern Pacific see increased growth. The opposite occurs during La Niña events, with growth in the west and decline in the east. Researchers pinpointed sea level changes as the key driver behind these patterns. For example, El Niño often causes sea levels to drop temporarily in the Western Pacific, increasing soil salinity and leading to mangrove dieback. The research team, including collaborators from Xiamen University and the National University of Singapore, used satellite-derived Leaf Area Index data, which measures plant productivity based on leaf density, alongside oceanic and climate datasets to assess mangrove health over time. Tulane Earth and Environmental Sciences professor Daniel Friess, a co-author of the study, said mangrove forests provide essential services to hundreds of millions of people worldwide, including storm protection, carbon storage and fisheries support. But their existence depends on a narrow set of environmental conditions, making them particularly sensitive to climate variations like El Niño. "Mangroves are one of the most valuable ecosystems on the planet, yet they exist in a delicate balance with their environment," Friess said. "A better understanding of how this unique habitat is influenced by changing environmental conditions will help us conserve and restore them, while supporting the coastal communities that rely on them."

Rivers support life -- but they also pose growing risks. As rainfall becomes more erratic and sea levels rise, floods are expected to become more frequent and severe in many parts of the world. Yet existing global river maps are outdated and overly simplified, assuming that rivers flow in a single direction and never split. They often overlook complex features, such as when a single river channel splits into multiple channels. These branching river systems are important because they are often found in densely populated, flood-prone regions, and they are crucial for understanding water movement across the Earth's surface. To address this limitation of existing river maps used for water management and flood prediction, the team have developed a new global river network called Global RIver Topology (GRIT), which includes these branching rivers and large canals, capturing the complexity. GRIT was created by combining high-resolution satellite imagery of rivers with advanced elevation data of the earth's surface. GRIT not only includes the main river channels but also provides information on river flow directions, widths, and points where rivers split. The GRIT river network has a total length of 19.6 million km and includes 67 thousand bifurcations. GRIT stands to significantly enhance applications in hydrology, ecology, geomorphology, and flood management. "We needed a global map that reflects the way rivers actually behave," said Dr Michel Wortmann, who developed GRIT at Oxford as a Research Associate on the EvoFLOOD project. "It's not enough to assume rivers just go downhill in a straight line -- especially not when we're trying to predict floods, understand ecosystems, or plan for climate impacts. This map shows the world's rivers in their full complexity." A major step forward for flood prediction and climate resilience Rivers are vital for ecosystems and human life, but as climate change drives more extreme weather, they are becoming increasingly dangerous -- especially during floods. To prepare, scientists and governments need to understand where water is likely to go at large scales. GRIT allows for a far more complete view of water movement, helping to improve flood models, water management systems and disaster planning. The new river network also supports the development of global data-driven (AI) models for flooding, drought, water quality, habitat conservation, and environmental risk. While GRIT already marks a big leap forward, the Oxford team notes that it's just the beginning. "GRIT has been built to evolve," said Louise Slater, Professor of Hydroclimatology at the University of Oxford. "Because it's fully automated, in contrast with previous global networks, we can keep updating it with the latest satellite images and topographic data, to understand shifts in the rivers and landscape." This work was funded by the EvoFLOOD Large Grant (NE/S015728/1), a £3.7m NERC-funded research programme on the Evolution of Global Flood Hazard and Risk.

"When people think about a coral reef, they often think about how beautiful it is," says author Daniel Wangpraseurt of the University of California San Diego. "What we sometimes forget is that coral reefs are one of the best structures in protecting our coasts. We are hoping to develop technologies to restore not just the ecosystem but the natural structures that will buffer shorelines against waves, storms, and floods." In the past, researchers have tried to restore coral reefs -- which have halved across the globe since the mid-20th century -- mainly through planting nursery-grown corals. But Wangpraseurt says these lab-grown corals are genetically identical, meaning that they're susceptible to the same threats. "If there's a warming event or a disease outbreak, it can wipe out the whole population. Ideally, we want to recruit corals naturally, which can introduce genetic diversity to the population and enhance their resilience," says Wangpraseurt. Biologists have recently discovered that certain rocky pink algae, called crustose coralline algae (CCA), play an important role in attracting coral larvae and encouraging them to settle on the reef. It appears that CCA emits metabolites into the surrounding water, and coral larvae follow these chemical signals. Inspired by this finding, Wangpraseurt and his team, including first author Samapti Kundu at the University of California San Diego, developed a transparent ink material infused with metabolites derived from CCA. Dubbed SNAP-X, the ink slowly releases these natural chemical cues into seawater over the course of a month. By applying SNAP-X to rocks or other surfaces, researchers can create an inviting microhabitat that helps coral larvae settle and grow. The team tested SNAP-X outdoors using natural seawater and continuous water flow to simulate the ocean environment. They found that the larvae of Montipora capitata, a primary reef-building coral in Hawaii, were 20 times more likely to settle on substrates sprayed with SNAP-X, and the settlements became denser when the team increased the concentration of the metabolites in SNAP-X. Given that some species of coral reproduce by releasing their eggs and sperm at the exact same time every year, the researchers recommend syncing SNAP-X deployment with the coral's spawning cycle to support natural coral recruitment. Depending on the species of coral, scientists can also tweak the ingredients of SNAP-X to include different metabolites and chemical signals that support the development of coral reefs. The team is now working on methods to scale up the production of SNAP-X. Because the ink contains no living materials, they hope that it will soon be approved for application in the real world. "It's really exciting to be able to learn from adjacent disciplines like materials science and bioengineering," says Wangpraseurt. "I think a lot of the technologies for restoring and protecting our environment are already there, we just need to look outside the box into other fields of study."

This is a promising new approach to forest dynamics, which have been fundamentally altered by climate change," says Annalena Lenk from the Institute of Biology at Leipzig University, lead author of the paper, adding that the lack of oak regeneration and the poor hydrological condition of many floodplains are widespread problems across Central Europe. In Leipzig, for example, urban expansion into the floodplain and the channelling of rivers have led to the loss of the typical flood dynamics characteristic of such habitats. She explains that this has encouraged the spread of flood-intolerant tree species such as sycamore and Norway maple. Their dense canopy casts deep shade over the forest floor, making it much harder for light-demanding species like pedunculate oak to regenerate. According to Lenk, this species plays a key role in biodiversity conservation, as it provides a habitat for a wide range of organisms, including insects, fungi, birds, bats and lichens. At present, however, a new structural shift in forest composition is becoming apparent. The droughts of recent years and the spread of pests in many parts of Europe -- including Leipzig -- have led to a sharp rise in tree mortality. As a result, forest stands have opened up significantly. This could, on the one hand, promote the natural regeneration of light-demanding species such as pedunculate oak. On the other hand, it may also allow more dominant species, such as maples, to spread further. The researchers investigated how these recent structural changes in the floodplain forest affect the regeneration of pedunculate oak and how they can be combined with forest management measures. They analysed the impact of different silvicultural interventions -- and the associated availability of light -- on the stand microclimate and the establishment of pedunculate oak. To do so, they set up eight research plots in areas of Leipzig's floodplain forest with a relatively healthy upper canopy and eight more in areas with high levels of dead or diseased trees. On two subplots of each research plot, they selectively removed flood-intolerant tree species such as sycamore and Norway maple, as well as elder, from the understorey. The other two subplots were left untreated. In addition to these plots, the researchers also included eight existing patch clearings from Leipzig's forest management programme -- areas ranging from 0.13 to 0.72 hectares that had already been partially opened up and planted with young oaks. In early 2022, the team planted a total of 1,200 one-year-old oaks protected by browsing guards, along with 80 approximately five-year-old oaks, and monitored their development over a two-year period. More light for young oaks thanks to thinned treetops "At the end of 2022, we replaced oaks that had already died with new plantings. In both years, we measured crown diameter in summer and height and root collar diameter in winter to calculate growth," explains Annalena Lenk, describing the methodology. The oaks were also tested for drought stress using leaf samples. In their oak experiment, the researchers found: "Forest areas with high tree mortality in the upper canopy can be effectively used to promote the regeneration of pedunculate oak -- but only if maple is removed from the understorey. Maple is widespread. Because it responds more quickly to growing conditions, it overtops and shades the oaks," says co-author Christian Wirth. Without the flood-intolerant species, the oaks were able to benefit from the increased light levels and develop well, as the canopy had been thinned by tree dieback. "Compared to the patch clearings, the plantings on the thinned forest plots showed fewer signs of drought stress, which was mainly due to higher air humidity," the researchers found. While oaks benefit from increased light availability, this positive effect is weakened by drought stress," explains Annalena Lenk. The light conditions and microclimatic environment on plots with high tree mortality in the upper canopy and selective thinning of specific species in the understorey appear to offer a balanced combination of sufficient light and a stable forest microclimate -- even in a drought year -- that supports oak regeneration. Adapting forest management to climate change The research findings could be considered in practice as part of climate-adapted forest management strategies aimed at promoting biodiversity -- including as a supplementary measure alongside future flooding events. The research plots have been established as long-term observation sites, allowing data collection to continue in the coming years. For example, a master's thesis is planned for next year that will examine the effects of different management methods -- and the resulting light conditions -- on the herb layer. The influence of climate change on vegetation processes, and in turn the impact of vegetation on the climate, is a central focus of Leipzig University's proposed Cluster of Excellence, Breathing Nature. Leipzig's floodplain forest is an important research platform in this collaborative project.

But Hanadi Rifai does. The Moores Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering and director of the Hurricane Resilience Research Institute, has spent two decades examining Galveston Bay -- its tides, currents and how fresh and salty water mix, continually extending the knowledge of predicting water levels, pollution spread and how ecosystems stay balanced. Now Rifai has created a sophisticated numerical computer model to help scientists and environmental experts understand how water moves in estuaries -- places where fresh and saltwater mix. The model is the focus of an article in the journal Environmental Science and Pollution Research. "Models such as this one will be critical for evaluating climate variability and sea level fluctuation impacts on these lifeline systems for coastal communities," reports Rifai, whose work will also guide better decisions to keep water clean, protect wildlife, and prevent flooding and pollution from spreading. Through the years Rifai has focused on emerging pollutants and pathogenic pollution and has conducted multiple sampling campaigns including sampling associated with hurricanes Ike and Harvey. She says the importance of taking samples over time and incorporating rainfall events and stream flows into predictive estuarine models cannot be overly emphasized. "An important lesson learned has been that the estuary while thriving and vibrant, is a complex system with many 'moving parts', and is sensitive to external influences that include extreme events (hurricanes, high winds, tidal fluctuations, extreme rainfall, drought, extreme heat, and industrial accidents and incidents)," said Rifai. "Historical uses have left their 'footprint' and continuing uses such as navigation, and recreation and municipal and industrial discharges are also associated with a 'trace'." The analysis Rainfall made water move faster, especially in the deep water Where rivers met the estuary, water flow and speed were more unpredictable Storms reduced salt but increased the amounts of suspended sediment in the water column (the surface to the bottom). Rainy days also increased sediment, which supports the idea of sediment mobilization during storms. The latter causes redistribution of pollutants within the estuary. "The interactions between the water column and the underlying sediment and how to model those was a key focus in addition to evaluating the influence of extreme rainfall and hurricanes on identifying depositional versus erosional parts of the system," said Rifai. Members of the team include Adithya Govindarajan, Gradient Corp., Boston, Martin Nguyen, a graduate student in the Rifai lab.

DSM operations are expected to increase the negative impact on environmental indicators by up to 13 per cent, a change categorized as having "great" significance, relative to the "without" DSM scenario, the study published in PLOS One said, notably through increased coastal vulnerability, pollution, and biodiversity loss. "The risks associated with DSM extend well beyond environmental degradation -- they pose significant hazards for marine ecosystems, coastal and Indigenous communities, and for businesses, in particular, the insurance industry," said Dr. Rashid Sumaila, professor at the University of British Columbia's Institute for the Oceans and Fisheries (IOF) and School of Public Policy and Global Affairs (SPPGA), and senior author of the study. "The potential liabilities inherent in DSM activities necessitate a reassessment of current insurance models," said Dr. Sumaila. "Our analysis indicated a surge in risk factors will lead to a large increase in economic risks, with an estimated 11 per cent rise in threats, including contractual violations and loss and profitability risks, which could have major implications for insurers, as they directly impact risk assessment models and industry stability." Dr. Lubna Alam, research associate at The University of British Columbia's Institute for the Oceans and Fisheries, and associate fellow at the Institute for Environment and Development of the National University of Malaysia, first author of the study pointed to recent climate change impacts already disrupting coastal insurance markets, including rising sea levels, more frequent hurricanes, and extreme weather events. "Think, for example, of places like Florida, in the United States, where its coastal environment is increasingly vulnerable to hurricanes, rising sea levels, and flooding. Insurance companies are pulling out of these high-risk areas. If the flood risk in your area surges up by 11 per cent, it would have a chilling effect on insurance companies. "That's exactly the kind of warning this 11 per cent increase signals for nature," said Dr. Alam. "And nature, unfortunately, cannot renegotiate its premiums." "We have also seen the unexpected impact of oil and gas catastrophes on the marine environment. The Exxon Valdez leak in Alaska in 1989 had devastating impacts on the local environment, and resulted in Exxon spending billions of dollars on clean-up costs and punitive damages. The Deepwater Horizon well blowout in 2010 in the Gulf of Mexico is considered one of the largest environmental disasters in world history, and continues to impact the area. Again, the economic costs paid by BP have been in the billions, and the environmental and health costs continue to affect the area," said Dr. Sumaila. "And these are environmental disasters that occurred in large developed countries. How would they impact SIDS, which are much closer to the areas that would see the DSM activities?" For small island states, climate change is also producing severe financial and economic consequences, which have resulted in greater risk scores, driving coverage higher or making it unavailable. An independent researcher from India, Ms. K. Pradhoshini, a co-author of this study, commented that, "many island nations are already facing reduced participation from private insurers, forcing governments to provide state-backed insurance with limited coverage. In such a scenario, a high-risk score, as observed through our study, can negatively impact a country's sovereign credit rating, increasing borrowing costs. This makes it harder for small island states to secure international funding for infrastructure and climate adaptation projects." "Fisheries and tourism -- key economic sectors for many small island states -- are also directly tied to environmental stability. If risk scores rise due to climate threats or ecosystem degradation from DSM, businesses may suffer losses, leading to employment instability, discouragement of investment, limitations on financial growth, and economic instability," said Ms. Pradoshini. Dr. Sumaila concurs, noting that currently projected plans for DSM are targeted for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone in the Pacific Ocean, one of the richest tuna fishing areas in the world. "Rising ocean temperatures are already causing tuna species to migrate eastward, reducing the catch within the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of Pacific SIDS, with a potential economic loss of up to $140 million annually by 2050 for these nations. Deep-sea mining activities can create sediment plumes, introduce noise and light pollution, and discharge water with higher concentrations of metals, potentially disrupting tuna habitats and altering their migration patterns, which would have a devastating effect on the sustainability of tuna fisheries and the economic resilience of SIDS." The study advocates for a shift toward circular economy strategies, such as enhanced recycling and urban mining, which offer sustainable alternatives to DSM. These approaches could reduce the risk exposure that all parties currently face, by mitigating the environmental and economic uncertainties linked to deep-sea mining operations. "Recently, researchers claim to have developed a process to recover nearly all of the lithium from used electric vehicle batteries for recycling," said Dr. Sumaila. "This is an example of other technologies that would help meet the growing demand for essential materials while dramatically reducing environmental and social risks." "Circular solutions can maximize our resource efficiency, extending the lifecycle of materials and promoting the reuse and recycling of existing stock of metals already in cirulation. This approach will not only decrease the demand for virgin minerals, but also minimizes waste, leading to a substantial reduction in the overall environmental footprint," Dr. Sumaila concluded.

Nature-based solutions, such as restoring mangroves and coastal strands, can help mitigate these risks by stabilizing shorelines, improving ecosystems and enhancing resilience to flooding and hurricanes. These solutions, alongside hybrid approaches and soft armoring, which uses natural materials like plants, sand dunes, or rocks to protect shorelines from erosion, offer effective, site-specific protection. While living shorelines are beneficial, they require careful design and planning to optimize their effectiveness. Researchers from Florida Atlantic University, in collaboration with The Nature Conservancy, created a new tool to identify the most effective shoreline stabilization methods to prevent erosion and protect the Florida Keys from damage caused by natural forces like waves, tides and storms. Maintaining the shape and integrity of the shoreline reduces the risk of further erosion while protecting ecosystems, properties and infrastructure. The goal is to guide decisions on using vegetated shorelines or combining them with structures to reduce waves, prevent erosion and protect Florida Keys communities from storms. Results of the study, published in the Journal of Marine Science Engineering , reveal that nearly 8% of the approximately 2,550 kilometers of shoreline in the Florida Keys is suitable for nature-based solutions -- mangrove planting, oyster reefs and beach dune vegetation -- or hybrid solutions -- some combination of hard structures and vegetation. Conversely, roughly 25.1% of the Florida Keys shoreline was deemed unsuitable for nature-based approaches, and approximately 67% is already vegetated or represents some other type of natural shoreline. For the study, researchers designed a GIS-based multi-criteria decision tool that facilitates coastal restoration and integrates nature-based solutions into conventional shoreline armoring. They combined spatial analysis tools with expert input to develop a weighted suitability score for various types of shoreline reinforcement where feasible. By integrating data on existing shoreline types -- sourced from an updated version of NOAA's NOS Environmental Sensitivity Index -- along with wind and wave exposure and physical environmental factors, they generated a composite Shoreline Relative Exposure Index. Based on this assessment, broadly defined categories of project types were recommended for various combinations of shoreline features and flood risk conditions. Experts who completed the survey covered coastal engineering, stormwater management, marine biology, habitat restoration, community resilience, urban planning and sustainability. The data was used to calculate scores, which were analyzed through a machine-learning model to identify the best stabilization options for different shoreline types, including developed, undeveloped and protected areas. Findings indicate that while conventional seawall armoring is needed in some areas of the Florida Keys coastline, hybrid and living shorelines should be prioritized where possible to protect people, habitats and resources. This requires involvement from private stakeholders and coordination among public entities to strengthen coastal resilience. "Implementing innovative shoreline stabilization methods is crucial as environmental shifts and population growth are expected to exacerbate flood management challenges, making it essential to adopt sustainable, nature-based solutions that enhance resilience and protect vulnerable communities," said Diana Mitsova, Ph.D., senior author and chair and professor of the Department of Urban and Regional Planning within FAU's Charles E. Schmidt College of Science. South Florida's coastal ecosystems, including mangrove swamps and coastal strands, have already been incorporated into various shoreline management practices that reduce erosion potential and create appropriate habitat conditions. Mangroves are essential for sustaining estuarine and marine ecosystems in South Florida, providing critical habitat, stabilizing shorelines and supporting biodiversity. They offer nesting spots for many species and help the marine food chain by being a main source of small bits of organic matter. Their complex root systems keep the soil in place, reduce water cloudiness and help collect debris and particles in the water. "New improvements in geospatial technology now allow us to combine human-made impact data with local land and ocean environmental data across large areas," said Chris Bergh, field program director at The Nature Conservancy. "This information helps coastal managers identify key areas that need protection or are important for commercial and recreational activities. By doing this, it can help avoid conflicts between different uses of the coast and create a more flexible, forward-thinking and sustainable way of managing the area." The data from this study can be accessed through The Nature Conservancy's Coastal Resilience, an online tool that uses GIS technology to help users visualize proposed shoreline stabilization methods tailored to different areas of the Florida Keys. It also allows users to overlay local data, like projected sea level rise, coastal habitats and land use. Study co-authors are Kevin Cresswell, Ph.D., an adjunct faculty in the FAU Department of Urban and Regional Planning; Melina Matos, Ph.D., an assistant professor in the FAU Department of Urban and Regional Planning; Stephanie Wakefield, Ph.D., an assistant professor in the FAU Department of Urban and Regional Planning; Kathleen Freeman, GIS specialist, The Nature Conservancy; and William Carlos Lima, Ph.D., an adjunct faculty in FAU Department of Urban and Regional Planning.

However, researchers say the situation can be complex, with low water flows in some rivers holding fish below the dams, delaying them from accessing spawning areas. They suggest prolonged dry spells, due to climate change, may increase this problem in certain areas of Great Britain in the future. Findings are published in the journal PLOS One . The research monitored trout movements in two streams in Scotland -- one modified by a series of four beaver dams and the other unaltered. The scientists observed the trout as they navigated the barriers during critical spawning periods (October to December). The fish were tracked using telemetry technology, where trout are tagged with microchips that are read by antennae spanning the dam structures. The researchers found that high river flows, triggered by rainfall, significantly increased the likelihood of successful upstream passage. Additionally, larger fish had greater success at navigating the dams. Conversely, during low flow periods, beaver dams posed a more significant obstacle, delaying or sometimes preventing trout movement upstream. Dr Robert Needham, Restoration Manager at Beaver Trust and former University of Southampton researcher, said: "Our findings highlight how adaptable brown trout are under favourable conditions, regularly passing beaver dams and with certain individuals making multiple repeat passes. However, as climate change continues to bring warmer and drier weather, the risk of migratory barriers may become a concern on certain rivers." Beavers were once common throughout Great Britain until they were hunted to extinction around the 16th Century. Their reintroduction in recent years has been heralded as a conservation success story with some 1.2 million of the animals now living wild across Europe. Populations in Great Britain are much smaller, the largest being in Scotland, with isolated populations in the south of England -- although DEFRA has just authorised the licenced release of beavers into the wild in England. The natural engineering of beaver habitats creates biodiversity benefits but has also sparked concerns about potential impacts on local fisheries, such as blocking of rivers and localised flooding. This new research underscores the importance of proactive management strategies to mitigate potential future challenges for fish migration, particularly in a shifting climate. "Our findings indicate how fish response to river modification through the construction of dams by beaver can be nuanced," says Professor Paul Kemp, the project lead at the University of Southampton. "In general, and if rivers are allowed to respond naturally, the benefits of beaver activity can be substantial from an ecological perspective. However, under some circumstances beaver dams can pose barriers to fish movement, particularly under low flows. "More research is now needed to understand how beaver dams might impede fish movements in more modified lowland rivers, such as in the south of England." The project was conducted in collaboration with the Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust (GWCT), Trout and Salmon Association, and NatureScot. Dylan Roberts, Head of GWCT Fisheries, comments: "Beavers are now back in England and Scotland, but the landscape is very different to when they were last here 500 years ago. With populations of many migratory fish, which need free passage up and downstream to access spawning areas and the sea, now at crisis point and classified as endangered. Such studies are crucial to better understand the interactions between beavers and migratory fish like brown trout and salmon." Dr Martin Gaywood, Species Projects Manager, NatureScot adds: "The interactions between beavers and fish have been the subject of great debate over many years, especially within Scotland. We were pleased to support this work, which makes another important contribution to our understanding of these complex relationships. This kind of evidence is vital in helping us and others to plan the continued restoration of beavers to Scotland, including how we use appropriate management and mitigation when necessary." The research was funded by the collaborating organisations, Natural Environmental Research Council (NERC) and the University of Southampton' s doctoral research programme SPITFIRE.

Published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) , this first-of-its-kind global synthesis identifies 603 species, genera, or families that influence Earth's surface processes. From tiny ants shifting soil to salmon reshaping riverbeds, the study highlights the diversity and scale of animals' impact across all freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems. By estimating the collective energy of these "natural engineers," the research shows that their geomorphic contributions rival those of hundreds of thousands of major floods. Key Insights from the Study: Professor Harvey explains: "This research shows that the role of animals in shaping Earth's landscapes is much more significant that previously recognised. From beavers creating wetlands to ants building mounds of soil, these diverse natural processes are crucial, yet we risk losing them as biodiversity declines." Nearly 30% of the identified species are rare, endemic, or threatened, meaning vital geomorphic processes could cease before their full significance is understood. This loss could have profound consequences for ecosystems and the landscapes they support. Looking Ahead: This research provides new insights for biodiversity conservation and ecosystem restoration. Rewilding and species reintroduction projects, such as the reintroduction of beavers to restore wetlands, show how harnessing these natural processes could help combat environmental challenges like erosion and flooding.

The study, titled Building Coastal Resilience with Mangroves: The Contribution of Natural Flood Defenses to the Changing Wealth of Nations, highlights the essential role mangroves play in protecting coastal communities from floods, storm surges, and erosion, offering significant benefits to both people and national economies. As climate change accelerates the frequency and severity of storms, the need for effective coastal defenses has become increasingly urgent. Traditionally, governments have turned to hard infrastructure like seawalls and levees to guard against floods. However, the center's study reveals that natural ecosystems -- particularly mangroves -- can be equally, if not more, effective as coastal defenses, while providing additional environmental benefits. Mangroves were first included as coastal protection assets by the World Bank in the 2021 edition of The Changing Wealth of Nations . This new research expands upon that earlier work by incorporating updated global data from 2020, offering a clearer picture of mangroves' protective value over time. Using advanced flood risk models, Menendez and Beck analyzed mangrove forests in 121 countries, covering 700,000 kilometers of subtropical coastlines. The study finds that the value of mangroves for flood-risk reduction is rising dramatically, in large part because of increasing populations, wealth and storms on coastlines around the world. From 1996 to 2010, the value of mangroves for flood-risk reduction increased by $130 billion, and from 2010 to 2020, mangrove long-term benefits rose by an additional $502 billion. Despite some declines in mangrove cover -- driven by factors such as shrimp farming and coastal development -- their value as flood buffers grew as more people and infrastructure came to rely on their protection. "The results are clear: Mangroves play a critical role in reducing flood risks and should be viewed as valuable natural assets," Menendez said. "They offer cost-effective protection to coastal communities and support national wealth by preserving lives, livelihoods, and infrastructure." The research goes beyond the environmental importance of mangroves, underscoring their economic value as natural capital assets. The $855 billion figure represents the present value of mangroves' flood protection services, i.e., the benefits of this natural infrastructure over the next 100 years. The countries benefiting most from these services every year include China, Vietnam, Australia, the United States, and India. The study also shows that while mangrove loss continued from 2010 to 2020, the rate of decline slowed significantly to just 0.66 percent. In that same period, the protective benefits provided by mangroves grew even faster than the overall flood risk. This marks a turning point, with mangroves protecting 61 percent more people and safeguarding 109 percent more capital assets from floods in 2020 compared to a decade earlier. Countries like Vietnam, Bangladesh, India, China, and Cameroon benefited most from these gains, with mangroves protecting hundreds of thousands of people each year. On the other hand, countries such as Malaysia, Myanmar, and Taiwan saw a decline in mangrove benefits, highlighting the need for increased conservation efforts in these regions. The findings come at a critical time as countries around the world search for sustainable solutions to rising climate risks. Mangroves offer a natural, cost-effective solution to flood protection, making them an essential component of any climate-adaptation strategy. As governments and policymakers look to the future, the study provides a compelling case for investing in the conservation and restoration of mangroves. "Protecting and restoring mangroves isn't just good for the environment -- it's a smart economic choice," Beck said. "These ecosystems provide invaluable services that help build resilience against the growing threats of climate change." The Center for Coastal Climate Resilience has also released these results and data as part of the Coastal Resilience Explorer decision-support tool.

Less than 30% of buildings in New York City, Amsterdam, Buenos Aires, Denver, central Sydney and central Melbourne were in neighbourhoods with adequate canopy cover. New York and Amsterdam both scored almost 0% for canopy cover despite 92% and 50% of buildings having views of at least three trees, respectively. The research, a collaboration with the Technical University of Munich, studied over 2.5 million buildings across eight cities using an emerging sustainable cities measure, known as the '3-30-300' rule. The rule states every house, school and workplace should have a view of at least three trees, be in a neighbourhood with at least 30% canopy cover, and be within 300 metres of a park. Only Seattle and Singapore passed the 30% canopy benchmark, with 45% and 75% of buildings in these cities enjoying adequate shade, respectively. Access to parks was also patchy, with Singapore and Amsterdam scoring high while Buenos Aires and New York City scored poorly. Lead researcher and RMIT University research fellow, Dr Thami Croeser, said it was concerning that most of the buildings in the study failed the 30% tree canopy test. With 2023 being the hottest year on record and 25% of the global population experiencing dangerous levels of extreme heat, canopy cover was urgently needed to cool down our cities, he said. "Previous research has shown depression, anxiety, obesity and heatstroke are more prevalent in urban areas that lack access to shady tree canopy and green open spaces," said Croeser, from RMIT's Centre for Urban Research. "Canopy cover doesn't just increase cooling, it can also reduce flood risk as well as benefit mental and physical health and support urban biodiversity. "Studies say we actually need at least 40% canopy cover to substantially lower daytime air temperatures, so the '30' metric is the absolute bare minimum -- and most buildings we studied don't even reach that goal." Croeser said current ways of designing or retrofitting streets did not support healthy canopy growth as planning prioritised infrastructure such as cabling and pipelines over tree growth. "We need to stop thinking that allocated spaces for buildings and roads are permanent when they could be reallocated to prioritise green infrastructure," he said. "30% canopy cover seems like a high bar if we keep doing things the same way, but it's totally achievable if we change a bit of our practice. "Currently, we put trees last, and if it gets in the way of cabling or pipes, we remove the tree or replace it with a sapling. "Designing trees into streets early, and then figuring out win-win solutions to get in utilities and traffic access, is one of the big changes we need to make a difference." Trees currently tend to be planted in conditions that were not easy for them to grow in, Croeser said. "The soil is compacted, there's asphalt over them and when it rains, the water runs off into the gutters instead of into the soil." "Earlier research shows that if urban trees are planted in better quality soil with enough space for them to grow, where rainwater can run directly into the soil, it will help trees grow bigger faster to address our lack of canopy cover. "Trees in urban environments are also removed and replaced with saplings, or pruned very heavily, so not many trees get the opportunity to grow into big old canopy trees except in a few lucky areas." A new nature access metric with potential While the '3-30-300' rule, devised by Dutch urban forestry expert Professor Cecil Konijnendijk, is still relatively new in Australia, it is gaining momentum internationally, with at least six cities in Europe, the US and Canada implementing the measure in their urban forestry strategies. Konijnendijk said he devised the benchmark to help set a 'bare minimum' for nature in cities. "Getting more parks and trees into cities is complicated work, and I realised that a simple metric could take the mystery out of it and set a proper benchmark based on evidence," he said. "I reviewed decades of science linking nature to human health -- and found that views to nature, canopy cover and parks are all really essential if we want to be mentally healthy, physically active and safe from heatwave impacts." Professor Wolfgang Weisser, from the Technical University of Munich, said metrics that benchmark the adequacy of green infrastructure at a neighbourhood level in relation to human wellbeing were still rare. "Some of the metrics we use now are not really sufficient whereas the '3-30-300' metric really demands that nature is brought to the areas that people actually live and work in," Weisser said. "A municipality with almost treeless streets and a few large, well-forested parks may score well on aggregated metrics of canopy and per-capita greenery but will be exposed as inadequate by the highly local '3' and '30' requirements." The researchers collaborated with Dutch firm Cobra Groeninzicht (Green Insights) to visualise the results. "With the techniques our team has developed, we can calculate the '3-30-300' benchmark for any city in the world," said Dirk Voets, Senior Advisor Geospatial at Cobra Groeninzicht.

Their findings, published today (Tuesday 12 December) in Scientific Reports, indicate that rising sea level and a climate phenomenon known as the Indian Ocean Dipole have led to some Maldivian islands losing over half of their mangrove cover since 2020. The research team, led by Northumbria University, warn that the findings have implications not only for the Maldives, but also for other island nations and coastal ecosystems around the world. In 2020, more than a quarter of the Maldivian islands containing mangrove forests saw their trees experiencing a gradual deterioration before dying, a condition known as dieback. Satellite imagery of both inhabited and uninhabited islands revealed the severity of this issue, showing that some islands lost over half of their mangrove cover. Mangroves play an essential role in protecting coastal regions by acting as natural barriers against storms, erosion and flooding. As biodiversity hotspots they are vital nurseries for marine species such as crabs, prawns and fish making them crucial for food security and livelihoods in many coastal communities. They also provide valuable resources such as construction materials for housing. A team of researchers, led by Lucy Carruthers and Vasile Ersek in Northumbria University's Department of Geography and Environmental Sciences, combined evidence from sea level, climate data and remote sensing with field observations of sediment geochemistry and dendrology to investigate the mangrove dieback. Their analysis of mangrove wood revealed that the dead trees showed greater signs of salinity stress compared to living trees. This stress indicates that the roots of the trees were struggling to cope with increased salt levels, which was a key factor in their eventual death. The researchers found that sea levels around the Maldives rose at an accelerated rate of over 30mm per year between 2017 to 2020. Towards the end of this period, an unusually intense climate phenomenon known as the Indian Ocean Dipole occurred. This caused warmer sea surface temperatures and an increase in sea level in the Western Indian Ocean. Although mangroves naturally build up their own sediment, allowing them to adapt to gradually rising seas, this rate of sea level rise was too fast for the mangroves to keep pace. As tidal movements are more limited in the basin areas where many mangrove forests grow, the rising sea level meant that seawater effectively flooded the forests. This lack of tidal movement and flooding prevented the mangroves from building the sediment they needed to stay above water. They eventually lost their resilience and died off by drowning. Dr Vasile Ersek, Associate Professor in Northumbria University's Department of Geography and Environmental Sciences explained: "Dieback was first observed in the centre of low-lying basin areas before gradually spreading outwards. As these basin areas have something we call limited tidal flushing we saw evidence of the rising sea level inundating the forests with seawater. This prolonged exposure created higher concentrations of salt. "As the mangroves' build-up of sediment slowed down due to the pace of the rising sea level, the soil salinity increased beyond what even these salt-tolerant trees could handle. Essentially, the mangroves were drowning. "The extreme magnitude of dieback seen in the Maldives is a vivid illustration of how climate change may push natural systems past their limits, with cascading consequences for both nature and people." Lucy Carruthers, now a postdoctoral scholar in East Carolina University's Department of Coastal Studies, led the project whilst working at Northumbria University. She said: "Sea level in the region reached its highest point on tide gauge records when the dieback occurred in 2020. This coincided with an intense positive phase in the Indian Ocean Dipole which can induce climate extremes for countries within the Indian Ocean. "As our planet continues to warm, we can expect to see the Indian Ocean Dipole occurring more frequently and at higher magnitude, meaning events like this mangrove die-off may become more common. "These remarkable forests have thrived at the interface of land and sea for many centuries. Whether they can survive the rapid changes of the coming decades will depend largely on our actions in managing the climate crisis today." The researchers noted there was published evidence of mangrove die off in other areas of the Indian Ocean around the same period, including the Seychelles and Madagascar, As mangrove forests store massive amounts of carbon -- typically three to five times more carbon per equivalent area than tropical rainforests -- the researchers raised concerns that the loss of mangrove forests could also release large amounts of stored carbon, further accelerating climate change. She added: "Our findings reveal the vulnerability of mangrove ecosystems to rapid sea-level rise and highlight the need for urgent adaptive conservation strategies in small island developing states. "This may sound like a local problem, but it's a warning for coastal areas worldwide. As climate change and extreme events intensify, some mangrove forests may struggle to keep up with sea level rise. The Maldives, as the world's lowest-lying nation, can therefore potentially be the canary in the coal mine."

The impacts of global climate change are now widely recognized, but the regional impacts -- especially in the Southern Hemisphere -- are less well understood. In the Southern Hemisphere and particularly in East Africa, climate change is primarily manifested through fluctuations in wind and sea surface temperatures that cause irregular cooling and warming periods, specifically, the global El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) in the Pacific Ocean and the regional Indian Niño in the Indian Ocean. These phenomena influence rainfall and temperature, making their patterns and interactions crucial to understanding the regional impacts of climate change. In the new study, researchers used a variety of models to uncover long-term trends, cycles and seasonality in rainfall, temperature and vegetation for the Greater Mara-Serengeti ecosystem, and influences from ENSO and the Indian Niño. The team found that the area experienced recurrent severe droughts and erratic wet conditions and recorded a rise in temperatures of 4.8 to 5.8 degrees Celsius over six decades. Wet and dry season rainfall amounts have fluctuated in varying cycles, but year-to-year, average rainfall has remained similar and occurred in regular seasons. However, rainfall was above average in both dry and wet seasons from 2010-2020, likely influenced by global warming and the Indian Niño. The researchers conclude that understanding regional climate trends and how they are influenced by large-scale oceanic and atmospheric oscillations is crucial for predicting future climate conditions and mitigating their impact on people and animals. For example, droughts increase the risk of starvation for wildlife, shrink wetlands and intensify human-wildlife conflicts, while heavy rainfall can lead to habitat destruction. The insights from this work can be used to develop strategies to reduce the impacts of climate change in the region and to inform environmental planning and conservation efforts. The authors add: "The Mara-Serengeti ecosystem, like many African savannas, has seen a 5.3-degree Celsius rise in minimum temperatures since 1960, concurrent with the warming Indian Ocean, leading to habitat desiccation and severe threats to wildlife populations. Frequent severe to extreme droughts and rare instances of very wet to extremely wet years in the Mara-Serengeti ecosystem also significantly threaten wildlife populations."

Now, a study from MIT shows that protecting and enhancing salt marshes in front of protective seawalls can significantly help protect some coastlines, at a cost that makes this approach reasonable to implement. The new findings are being reported in the journal Communications Earth and Environment , in a paper by MIT graduate student Ernie I. H. Lee and professor of civil and environmental engineering Heidi Nepf. This study, Nepf says, shows that restoring coastal marshes "is not just something that would be nice to do, but it's actually economically justifiable." The researchers found that, among other things, the wave-attenuating effects of salt marsh mean that the seawall behind it can be built significantly lower, reducing construction cost while still providing as much protection from storms. "One of the other exciting things that the study really brings to light," Nepf says, "is that you don't need a huge marsh to get a good effect. It could be a relatively short marsh, just tens of meters wide, that can give you benefit." That makes her hopeful, Nepf says, that this information might be applied in places where planners may have thought saving a smaller marsh was not worth the expense. "We show that it can make enough of a difference to be financially viable," she says. While other studies have previously shown the benefits of natural marshes in attenuating damaging storms, Lee says that such studies "mainly focus on landscapes that have a wide marsh on the order of hundreds of meters. But we want to show that it also applies in urban settings where not as much marsh land is available, especially since in these places existing gray infrastructure (seawalls) tends to already be in place." The study was based on computer modeling of waves propagating over different shore profiles, using the morphology of various salt marsh plants -- the height and stiffness of the plants, and their spatial density -- rather than an empirical drag coefficient. "It's a physically based model of plant-wave interaction, which allowed us to look at the influence of plant species and changes in morphology across seasons," without having to go out and calibrate the vegetation drag coefficient with field measurements for each different condition, Nepf says. The researchers based their benefit-cost analysis on a simple metric: To protect a certain length of shoreline, how much could the height of a given seawall be reduced if it were accompanied by a given amount of marsh? Other ways of assessing the value, such as including the value of real estate that might be damaged by a given amount of flooding, "vary a lot depending on how you value the assets if a flood happens," Lee says. "We use a more concrete value to quantify the benefits of salt marshes, which is the equivalent height of seawall you would need to deliver the same protection value." They used models of a variety of plants, reflecting differences in height and the stiffness across different seasons. They found a twofold variation in the various plants' effectiveness in attenuating waves, but all provided a useful benefit. To demonstrate the details in a real-world example and help to validate the simulations, Nepf and Lee studied local salt marshes in Salem, Massachusetts, where projects are already underway to try to restore marshes that had been degraded. Including the specific example provided a template for others, Nepf says. In Salem, their model showed that a healthy salt marsh could offset the need for an additional seawall height of 1.7 meters (about 5.5 feet), based on satisfying a rate of wave overtopping that was set for the safety of pedestrians. However, the real-world data needed to model a marsh, including maps of salt marsh species, plant height, and shoots per bed area, are "very labor-intensive" to put together, Nepf says. Lee is now developing a method to use drone imaging and machine learning to facilitate this mapmaking. Nepf says this will enable researchers or planners to evaluate a given area of marshland and say, "How much is this marsh worth in terms of its ability to reduce flooding?" The White House Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs recently released guidance for assessing the value of ecosystem services in planning of federal projects, Nepf explains. "But in many scenarios, it lacks specific methods for quantifying value, and this study is meeting that need," she says. The Federal Emergency Management Agency also has a benefit-cost analysis (BCA) toolkit, Lee notes. "They have guidelines on how to quantify each of the environmental services, and one of the novelties of this paper is quantifying the cost and the protection value of marshes. This is one of the applications that policymakers can consider on how to quantify the environmental service values of marshes," he says. The software that environmental engineers can apply to specific sites has been made available online for free on GitHub. "It's a one-dimensional model accessible by a standard consulting firm," Nepf says. "This paper presents a practical tool for translating the wave attenuation capabilities of marshes into economic values, which could assist decision-makers in the adaptation of marshes for nature-based coastal defense," says Xioaxia Zhang, a professor at Shenzen University in China who was not involved in this work. "The results indicate that salt marshes are not only environmentally beneficial but also cost-effective." Lee received support for this work from the Schoettler Scholarship Fund, administered by the MIT Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering.

Natural coastlines, including coral reefs, marshes, and mangroves, are complete and stable, capable of self-regulation and restoration. That is, unless human interventions, such as urbanization, overdevelopment, pollution, and human-made erosion, make these areas vulnerable to devastation. Artificial coastlines, including human-made dikes and other engineered constructions, can help prevent erosion and protect from storms and flooding. However, ecological functions remain unprotected from many of these structures. In Biointerphases, an AVS journal published by AIP Publishing , researchers from Southeast University and the University of Chinese Academy of Science investigated the use of specialized types of cement for coastline ecological protection. "New substrate materials need to be developed to reduce the biological toxicity effects on marine organisms," said author Xiaolin Lu. Current artificial reef blocks are built using cement with a highly alkaline pH of +12 which is harmful to biofilm on reef surfaces. Biofilm, made up of such microorganisms as bacteria, algae, and fungi, provides food for grazers and promotes larval settlement. The team started with a limestone and clay cement that hardens underwater. Two types of treatments were added to the cement: polyacrylamide, a synthetic resin used in water treatment, and chitosan, a form of sugar made from the shells of shrimp and other crustaceans. The two treatments were mixed into the cement to form the hardened substrate, and they were sprayed onto previously hardened cement as a surface treatment. The bulk-treated and surface-treated samples were tested for mechanical strength and biofilm and coral growth. The samples, along with a control of plain cement, were placed in a sea tank and treated with biofilm cultures and transplanted coral. After two days, biofilm was found active and growing well on the surface-treated samples. After 30 days, biofilm growth was found to be greatest on the surface-treated samples, a little less on the bulk-treated samples, and significantly less on the cement control. The reduced biofilm growth on the control was attributed to the high alkalinity of the cement without anything to block its effects. Transplanted coral samples also survived and grew better on the surface-treated samples. While the bulk-treated samples supported reduced survival and growth of both biofilm and coral, mechanical properties appeared to be significantly reduced compared to the control and the surface-treated samples. "These new treatments showed the necessary biocompatibility in a simulated marine eco-environment, which can be used to promote biofilm growth without interfering in extended habitation of model coral samples," said Lu. Future research from the team will focus on long-term surface wear testing and biocompatibility in real-life applications.

Gaps in the forest stand, whether caused by silvicultural intervention or by the death of large trees, can play a central role in the microclimate and biological processes in the forest soil. In view of climate change, the question of how such gaps affect the microclimate and soil biological activity is becoming increasingly important. For this study, the scientists investigated the effects of forest gaps of different sizes and structures on the microclimate and decomposition processes in the soil of a European mixed floodplain forest (Leipzig, Germany) in the drought year 2022. "As expected, the soil temperature rises compared to closed forest and the fluctuations in air and soil temperature increase," says the study's lead author Annalena Lenk from the Institute of Biology at Leipzig University. "In summer, the monthly average soil temperatures in areas with gaps were up to 2.05 °C higher than in sections of closed forest. At the same time, however, the soil in the gaps was wetter, in some cases significantly so." This is thought to be a result of reduced transpiration in large trees and less precipitation being intercepted by the trees due to the smaller tree population. Interestingly, the density of the shrub layer and tree understorey sometimes had a greater effect on soil temperatures than the overstorey: "In forest areas with a denser understorey, the temperatures and their fluctuations were more moderate than in areas where the understorey had been artificially thinned." To understand the impact of changing microclimatic conditions on key ecosystem functions, Lenk and her team also studied the activity of soil organisms. To this end, experiments were carried out on the decomposition rate of different substrates (green tea, rooibos tea and wooden spatulas) and on the feeding activity of soil fauna using bait strips. "Surprisingly, we found no significant differences in soil biological activity between gaps and closed forest," says Lenk. However, a positive effect on the feeding activity of soil organisms was measurable due to increasing soil temperature over the course of the season despite decreasing soil moisture. "Despite the extreme dryness, decomposition rates were as expected. The microclimatic differences between forest gaps and closed stands were apparently not large enough to significantly affect soil activity." According to the author, this is a reassuring result for the time being, as both increased and decreased decomposition rates can have negative effects on the ecosystem. Lenk adds that the findings of this study highlight the complex interactions between forest structure, microclimate and soil processes: "Our results are an important step towards a better understanding of how forests respond to structural changes in times of climate change," says Lenk. The findings may also be of importance for nature conservation measures that provide for a partial removal of the canopy to promote biodiversity. Further research into these interactions in different forest types and the integration of microclimatic measurements into forest monitoring programmes are desirable in order to develop sustainable forest management strategies under changing macroclimatic conditions.

Since the 1990s, California has led the nation in the growth of Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) development, with more than one in three households in the state now located immediately next to or within natural areas. This proximity to wildlands puts WUI residents at higher-risk for climate-related natural disasters like fires, floods, and landslides. Extensive WUI development also makes wildfires more likely, while negatively impacting wildlife habitat and resulting in longer commutes, which increases greenhouse gas emissions. Despite growing recognition of the serious hazards and massive scale of WUI development, the causes of this type of growth are still not well understood. UC Santa Cruz Sociology Professor Miriam Greenberg, lead author of the new article, believes that incorporating new perspectives and methods from the social sciences will help to change that. "In the past, most approaches to studying the WUI have been from a natural systems perspective," she said. "But our research aims to demonstrate that you can't extricate these environmental and ecological dynamics from urban and housing dynamics -- it's all interconnected. So we're really excited to be doing primary research that will help us understand, for the first time, the drivers, demographics, and related dynamics of WUI growth, taking the broader context of the housing crisis into consideration." Greenberg added that California has the unfortunate distinction of facing both the most extreme housing crisis in the United States and a rate and scale of WUI growth that is unequaled elsewhere in the country. That makes the state a particularly important laboratory for studying these issues and the potential relationships between them. For the upcoming research, which is currently in progress, the team is using a mixed-methods approach that will include surveys and ethnographic interviews and will integrate census data with WUI mapping and ecology data. Another aspect of the study, which was not a focus of the recent article, will explore Indigenous land stewardship, habitat restoration, and prescribed burning in the context of WUI growth. The research will be conducted along California's Central Coast, one of the most unaffordable housing markets in the U.S. The project will involve a wide range of community partners and faculty and staff across UC Santa Cruz and San Jose State, including Associate Professor of Sociology Hillary Angelo and Environmental Studies Professor Chris Wilmers, who are coauthors of the current article alongside Greenberg and UCSC Sociology graduate student Elena Losada. The paper shares three main predictions for trends that the research team thinks they will find in the WUI. First, they believe there has been a major shift in what motivates people to move to WUI areas. While people may have historically chosen to live in the WUI because of generational ties to an area or a desire to be closer to nature, the researchers believe that housing affordability has become a main driver of increased migration to the WUI since the 1990s, as a growing number of Californians have been priced out of urban areas due to the state's worsening housing crisis. The demographics of this may play out differently in different types of WUI areas, which themselves are shaped by a combination of political, economic, and environmental factors. For example, WUI "interface" development that sprawls out from urban areas to the edges of wild areas is likely to be filled primarily with middle-income commuters, the researchers suspect. Meanwhile, they expect that more remote development within wildland areas -- called WUI "intermix" development -- will have particularly stark inequality, featuring a combination of estates for the wealthy, modest older homes, and informal, off-the-grid living, including in trailers and vehicles. The paper argues that the rise of affordability-driven migration has likely resulted in overall growth of inequality in the WUI, and this has exacerbated the impact of environmental disasters fueled by climate change. While all residents of these communities face the same risks, differences in wealth, time availability, and knowledge of the local landscapes mean that households have very different abilities to prepare for and recover from disasters, researchers believe. As a result, newer and lower-income residents who move to the WUI primarily for affordability reasons may end up suffering disproportionately when disaster strikes. Overall, the paper's authors anticipate that their findings will demonstrate the need to treat the affordable housing crisis as not only a major social issue but also a significant sustainability problem that must be addressed in order to protect communities from climate change. Tackling that challenge will require integrating planning and policy for housing and climate change at the local, state, and federal levels, as well as routinely bringing the social sciences and natural sciences together for research on these issues, the paper says. Ultimately, the research team argues that affordable housing production and preservation and protection of tenants in urban areas are crucial actions that shape sustainability, both within cities and far beyond. "We really need to expand the frontiers of how we think about urban sustainability, because it doesn't just end at city boundaries," said the paper's coauthor, Associate Professor of Sociology Hillary Angelo. "Without enough affordable urban housing, people are being pushed to riskier areas outside of cities, and that makes cities unjust while also having terrible social and environmental impacts elsewhere. Understanding these interconnections is key to true sustainability."

A group of conservationists from Bolivia, Brazil, Peru, Ecuador, the US and the UK say that current conservation and development efforts will never sustain or scale without systemic changes in how economies are designed. Despite extensive destruction of the Amazon in the name of economic development, Amazonian communities have seen little improvement in income, life expectancy, and education. The researchers have proposed a new model and associated policy changes that could create fair and sustainable futures for the Amazon and its people by improving infrastructure, supply chains, and social organisations. Their results, reported in the journal Nature Ecology and Evolution , are focused on the Amazon, however the researchers say similar economic models could be implemented around the world if the political will exists. The Amazon basin is home to the world's largest tropical rainforest, representing over half of the world's remaining rainforest, and stores vast amounts of carbon. However, decades of large-scale deforestation, as well as the increased risk of fires and floods due to climate change, has put much of the Amazon rainforest under threat. In addition to what the loss of the Amazon would mean for global carbon emissions, the rainforest is also home to many indigenous peoples and thousands of species of plants and animals. "We need a different vision for the Amazon if we're going to protect it," said lead author Professor Rachael Garrett from the University of Cambridge's Department of Geography and the Conservation Research Institute. "Half a century of deforestation and exploitation of the Amazon has not resulted in widespread development, and now the economic value of deforested areas is threatened, not to mention the threats to the global climate and water security." Working with colleagues from the Amazonian region, Garrett has proposed building on the success of indigenous and traditional communities to develop new economies, which could protect much of the Amazon while also improving the livelihoods, health, and food security of the many people who live there. These economic models are known as socio-bioeconomies, or SBEs. "Conventional economic models can result in short-term gains, but over the longer term, the people and resources of the Amazon basin have been exploited by powerful interests, while there has been an underinvestment in education, innovation, and sustainable infrastructure," said Garrett. "The conventional economic model is simply not sustainable." The SBE model is focused on using and restoring Amazonian and other ecosystems sustainably, and supporting indigenous and rural communities. An SBE economy might include eco-friendly tourism, or the sustainable harvest and processing of plant products into valuable foods, beverages, clothing, and medicines. "A limited range of interests are controlling the development agenda in most countries," said Garrett. "The only way we can change that is improving the rights and representation of the people who are not benefiting from the systems and are being harmed by ongoing environmental destruction. We believe it is possible to have win-wins for humanity and conservation, but not if we continue to consume products that have a massively negative impact. SBEs can help put these win-wins into policy and practice." Garrett cites the footwear brand Veja as an example of such a win-win. The French company buys the rubber for its sneakers from small-scale Amazonian rubber farmers, and purchases 100% of the responsibly harvested native rubber in Brazil. As part of its sustainability efforts, the company focuses on building communities of small-scale farmers and has been financially successful without traditional advertising. Garrett and her collaborators are calling for massive increases in social mobilisation, technology and infrastructure to support SBEs. Under an SBE model, governmental subsidies would be redirected away from agribusiness and toward smaller-scale sustainable development. The researchers also outline how to build connections between rural and urban policies in SBEs. An example is the establishment of public procurement programmes where healthy and sustainably produced foods are purchased directly from indigenous and small farming communities and served in school lunch programmes and hospitals, instead of supporting large-scale agribusiness engaged in degrading practices. Other policy changes that could support an SBE model include redirecting finance to conservation and restoration activities, supporting community enterprises, and ensuring participatory processes to ensure inclusive, long-term benefits. "It's possible to have an economy that is strong and works for everyone when we dare to develop new models and visions that recognise the interconnectedness of people and nature," said Garrett. "By popularising these ideas, investing in people and businesses who are making a difference, and supporting research into SBE innovation we can support a transformation in both conservation and development in the Amazon. "The SBE model could help protect the Amazon and its people while avoiding climate and biodiversity disasters, but there needs to be the political will to make it happen." Rachael Garrett is the incoming director of the University of Cambridge Conservation Research Institute and a Fellow of Homerton College, Cambridge. She is a council member of the Cambridge Conservation Initiative and serves on the UN Science Panel for the Amazon.

Schistosomiasis, spread by freshwater snails, affects more than 200 million people in many tropical regions of the world. It can cause stomach pain and irreversible consequences such as enlarged liver and cancer. Public health officials worry that deforestation, rapid urban sprawl, and changing rainfall patterns -- such as Brazil's devastating May floods -- could dramatically shift the locations where the snails, and therefore the parasite, can thrive. "With climate change, more frequent and intense rains will impact many diseases here, including schistosomiasis," said Roseli Tuan, a senior researcher at the São Paulo Secretariat of Health, where she has conducted schistosomiasis surveillance and research in the state of São Paulo, Brazil, for more than 30 years. "Understanding these changes is a necessary area of science for the control of the disease in the future." Tuan and her Brazilian colleagues have been partnering with Stanford disease ecology researchers to develop models that can predict how the disease risk will shift in response to environmental changes. Their findings were recently published in Nature Communications and PLOS Global Public Health . "For the first time, we have been able to combine tools like long-term snail surveillance records with satellite imagery that tracks agricultural expansion, the growth of urban areas, and climate at fine resolution across entire countries," said Erin Mordecai, an associate professor of biology in the School of Humanities and Sciences and a global health faculty fellow in the Stanford Center for Innovation in Global Health. "With these tools, we can map how the habitat for schistosomiasis-transmitting snails is changing across Brazil with unprecedented precision that helps us understand where schistosomiasis could appear next." Mordecai co-supervised the work with Giulio DeLeo, who is also a global health faculty fellow and a professor of oceans and of Earth system science in the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability. The collaboration has helped epidemiologists and researchers update their paradigms about schistosomiasis in Brazil and prioritize public health interventions considering environmental changes, said Tuan, who has studied the genetics and evolution of the snail vector for schistosomiasis for four decades. While Brazil has the chance to eliminate schistosomiasis in some parts of the country thanks to improved sanitation and living conditions, climate change and economic disparities threaten progress in other areas, she said. "These analyses have clearly identified, for the first time, rapidly growing informal settlements both in rural areas or at the outskirts of urban centers as the most likely habitat for the snails as well as potential transmission hotspots for schistosomiasis," said De Leo, who is also the principal investigator of the international team supported by the Belmont Collaborative Forum grant. "They open new opportunities for disease surveillance and interventions that can reduce the risk of schistosomiasis transmission." Harnessing machine learning to predict future disease risk In 2021, a Belmont Forum/São Paulo Research Foundation grant and Stanford Global Health Seed Grant enabled disease ecology experts from Stanford and Brazil to collaboratively build tools to predict the effects of environmental changes on the disease-spreading snails. At the heart of this effort is a tool called species distribution modeling. It combines machine learning and remotely sensed data -- such as satellite imagery and large-scale climate models -- to identify all the places where a species could live, based on where it has and hasn't been found in the past. The models can then predict how changes in temperature, rainfall, and urbanization will affect the species' distributions in the future. And yet, when Aly Singleton, a PhD student in Stanford's Emmett Interdisciplinary Program in Environment and Resources, set out to build such a model for snails, she found little information to help her decide which methodology would be best. "Despite species distribution models becoming increasingly popular tools, there are still a lot of open questions about how to best build the models," Singleton said. "I wanted to create a resource that could inform our team's efforts and also be useful to researchers using these methods around the world." Singleton's study compared models using different machine learning methods to see which could most accurately forecast how snail species responded to changes in their environment. She used vast datasets with more than 11,000 records of snail location gathered by Brazilian scientists from 1992 to 2019. Singleton looked at how accurately the models predicted where the snails might be given various changes in climate, hydrology, land use, and soil type. She consulted with local experts, like Roseli Tuan, Antonio Miguel Vieira Monteiro of Brazil's National Institute for Space Research in Sau Paulo, Brazil, and Roberta Lima Caldeira of Fiocruz Minas in Minas Gerais, Brazil, who used their first-hand experience to judge the resulting maps' accuracy. Singleton said that many of the models performed similarly in terms of accuracy and precision, but they produced very different maps of snail distribution. "It was absolutely critical to have the expert knowledge of people who know the area well and have been in this field for many years to be able to comment on which model they think is better and why," she said. Some models provided much broader estimates of which areas were favorable to the snails, while others were much more stringent and narrow in their predictions of where the snail might be. Both types of models could be useful under different circumstances, Singleton said. For instance, in a region with more limited resources to address schistosomiasis, the more stringent model could help identify areas to prioritize -- those areas where the snail was almost sure to be found. On the other hand, if a country wished to eliminate schistosomiasis, officials might opt to use the broader model that predicted all possible snail habitats. Tracking 'a moving target' The next step was applying Singleton's findings about effective species distribution mapping to better understand how climate and land use change impacted the distribution of snails in Brazil. Singleton's colleague Caroline Glidden, a senior scientist in the Mordecai Lab, led this research while also a fellow with the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence (Stanford HAI). She found that climate-induced changes -- especially in precipitation patterns -- have driven broad shifts in the snails' range over the last 30 years. Urbanization, meanwhile, has driven more localized changes, such as the emergence of new pockets of habitat suitable to snails in areas that experienced significant population growth. As rainfall patterns shift and Brazil undergoes rapid land-use change, new areas are expected to become favorable to the snails, which thrive in slow-moving freshwater sources, Glidden said. These include drainage ditches and canals, such as those associated with irrigation on small-scale farms. "The general trend is that environmental changes don't just expand snail habitat -- they shift the location completely, making schistosomiasis a moving target for public health intervention and control," Glidden said. "Without these analyses, it would be very difficult to aim to eliminate schistosomiasis in Brazil." Tuan said the research will help public health officials identify priority schistosomiasis elimination zones. Global impact Singleton hopes their efforts to identify effective species distribution modeling methods will help researchers beyond Brazil to predict vector-borne and environmentally-mediated disease risks. "These tools are going to become increasingly valuable as we seek to understand how species populations might change with climate and land use change," she said. "I hope this paper can help scientists new to these methods and be the resource I was looking for at the beginning of this project." Brazilian collaborator organizations critical to this project included Brazil's National Institute for Spatial Research (INPE) and the René Rachou Institute, a unit of the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ Minas). Stanford co-authors not already mentioned include: Andrew Chamberlin, life science research professional, and Susanne H. Sokolow, senior research scientist. Additional co-authors are from the Pasteur Insitute -- São Paulo Secretariat of Health, the René Rachou Institute, a unit of Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz Minas), Brazil's National Institute for Space Research, Harvard University, and Stony Brook University. De Leo and Mordecai are also senior fellows at Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment, members of Stanford Bio-X, and faculty affiliates of Stanford HAI. The project was supported by the Belmont Collaborative Forum on Climate, Environment and Health and The São Paulo Research Foundation, FAPESP, along with a 2021 Global Health Seed Grant funded by the Woods Institute for the Environment, Bob & Kathy Burke, and Stanford Center for Innovation in Global Health.

The research, published in the journal Environmental Pollution , is one of the first to examine the combined effects of seawater flooding and microplastic pollution on coastal plants. It showed that both stressors had some effects on the species tested, with microplastics impacting the plants' reproduction while flooding caused greater tissue death. However, being exposed to both microplastics and flooding together -- a threat likely to increase as a result of climate change and plastic use -- had a more pronounced impact on their resource allocation. This in turn led to the plants exhibiting altered growth and experiencing a short-term suppression in their photosynthetic efficiency, responses affect the plants' ability to capture water, nutrients and sunlight, and contribute to ecosystem wellbeing. The study was led by experts in plastic pollution and plant biology from the University of Plymouth's School of Biological and Marine Sciences and International Marine Litter Research Unit. They say it signposts the potential for microplastics to present an elevated risk when in combination with additional stressors like seawater flooding and that, as a result, establishing the threats presented by multiple co-occurring stressors on ecosystem resilience is a priority. Dr Winnie Courtene-Jones, the study's lead author, said: "This research highlights the potential for microplastics, composed of conventional and biodegradable plastic, to detrimentally affect plant functioning. Moreso, it indicates that the effect of microplastics can be magnified by other environmental factors such as rising sea levels and coastal flooding. Studies such as this help us appreciate the potential harm posed by microplastics to a range of organisms, and ecosystem resilience generally." The study was carried out as part of BIO-PLASTIC-RISK, a £2.6million project led by the University and supported by the Natural Environment Research Council. It focused on buck's horn plantain (Plantago coronopus), a low-growing perennial native to Europe, Asia and North Africa -- but also found in the United States, Australia, and New Zealand -- which commonly grows in sand dune and beach shingle coastal habitats. Plants were grown in soil containing conventional or biodegradable plastics for 35 days before being flooded with seawater for 72 hours, replicating the kinds of flooding event increasingly associated with storms and coastal storm surges. They were then grown for a further 24 days with scientists monitoring plant survival in addition to factors such as plant size, photosynthetic efficiency and flower production. Dr Mick Hanley, Associate Professor in Plant-Animal Interactions and senior author on the study, added: "On a global scale, habitats such as coastal dunes and grasslands help protect communities in the form of coastal defences and wind protection. They also play a critical role in supporting biodiversity, but are coming under increasing threat from climate change and a number of other environmental factors. This study emphasises that we should not be looking at those threats in isolation as, put together, their impacts can be more pronounced. That is particularly worrying given that both microplastic pollution and coastal flooding are projected to worsen and intensify over the coming decades unless ambitious global actions are implemented."

Instead of rebuilding the dykes to manage water flows and prevent future floods, scientists at UBC, along with members of the Sumas First Nation and other research partners, suggest an alternative: let Sumas Lake, which was drained in the early 1920s and converted into the farmland known as Sumas Prairie, return to its natural state. This can be done by buying out properties on the lakebed -- a solution that is projected to cost around $1 billion, less than half of the estimated $2.4 billion cost of repairing the dykes and installing a new pump station. "Dyke rehabilitation programs tend to assume that future waterflows will be predictable, however climate projections show that flooding events are likely to increase in the future -- and the water needs somewhere to go," says study author Riley Finn, a researcher at the Martin Conservation Decisions Lab at UBC in a paper published today in Frontiers of Conservation Science . "By restoring Sumas Lake -- Semá:th Xhotsa -- we can help the region adapt to future floods, facilitating climate resiliency in the long term. It is the most ecologically responsible solution for flood management in the region." Ecological reconciliation The authors note that restoring the lake will also promote healthy food systems and ecological reconciliation, addressing the ongoing harms caused by the loss of the lake to the Semá:th people. Before its conversion to agricultural land, Sumas Lake supported thriving populations of salmon, sturgeon, ducks, and food and medicinal plants, many of which are now endangered. Chief Dalton Silver, Sumas First Nation said "For the Semá:th people, the lake represented life and livelihood. In 1924, the lake was drained in an instance of land theft, decimating an ecology that supported a rich and diverse Indigenous food system and replacing it with a settler food system. "My grandpa used to say that in the Coast Salish Territory, Semá:th was the central location where the people used to gather. The people gathered in the summertime as we had Semá:th Lake that once offered every species of fish right there at the front of our village and in the wintertime, people gathered there from all parts of the Coast Salish Territory for the winter ceremonies." Managed retreat The study integrates Indigenous laws and oral tradition and the concept of "managed retreat" -- the purposeful relocation of people and infrastructure to safer areas. "In a time when climate-change induced flooding is predicted to increase, our study shows that incorporating Indigenous laws and knowledge is essential for developing more sustainable and just solutions," said Dr. Tara Martin, the study's senior author and a professor of forest and conservation sciences at UBC. "We need to explore innovative solutions, not just build more dykes." Humans seem to want to build bigger and better infrastructure but it is always at the detriment of our ecosystem and environment, added co-author Murray Ned, a member of the Sumas First Nation and executive director of the Lower Fraser Fisheries Alliance. "Mother Nature signaled to us in 1990 and 2021 that the spirit of the Semá:th Xhotsa is alive and well, and ready to return with or without our cooperation. This research demonstrates that there are more economical and logical options that would allow us to reconcile some of the past harms of draining the lake a hundred years ago, and still maintain agricultural opportunities and the farming community in the region," said Ned.

Researchers from the University of Plymouth have spent a number of years exploring how temperate rainforests could be an effective nature-based solution to some of the planet’s greatest challenges. They have also shown that the UK’s uplands could in future see significantly more annual rainfall than is currently being predicted in national climate models. In new research, they found that higher soil water levels within areas such as Dartmoor, the Lake District and the Scottish Highlands could have a significant impact on the survival rates of both acorns and juvenile oak saplings. Published in the journal Forest Ecology and Management , it is the first study to highlight the importance of factoring in soil conditions when looking at where and how to create the temperate rainforests of the future. Dr Thomas Murphy, Lecturer in Environmental Sciences at the University of Plymouth, is the study’s lead author. He said: “In recent years, there have been increasing calls to plant more trees as part of the global effort to combat climate change. Restoration and expansion of temperate rainforests, which are a globally rare ecosystem, is seen as one of the potential solutions. But with our previous work also predicting an increase in future rainfall we wanted to know if the woodlands we create will support naturally colonising trees in future. Our results show that higher water levels within soils directly contribute to reduced survival of both acorns and young oak trees. We believe it provides landowners, land managers and policy makers with important information as to which species might work in particular locations to support more resilient future rainforests.” For the study, researchers planted acorns from English oaks (Quercus robur) in containers with four soil states, from completely flooded to low saturation where the water level was 220mm below the acorn. The acorns did not survive in the flooded soils, but survival rates improved gradually – 43% at high saturation, 77% at medium saturation, and 83% at low saturation – as the water level dropped. The surviving seedlings also exhibited reduced root:shoot ratio, leaf photosynthesis, and a lower likelihood of late season shoot growth in soils of higher saturation. In a concurrent field experiment, juvenile English oak and Sessile oak (Quercus petraea) saplings were planted in a region of Dartmoor that is seasonally waterlogged and frequented by grazing livestock. In these tests, the English oaks exhibited greater shoot growth and leaf photosynthesis than its close relation in areas where the soil was more saturated. The researchers, including environmental scientists and ecologists, say the results highlight the need for better understanding of soil influence on tree development. Dr Murphy added: “There has been extensive talk about how larger trees respond to the effects of climate change. But these results show we need to factor in the response of young trees as well, especially if they are being envisioned as an integral part of the solution. By examining their response to conditions now, while also thinking about what these locations are going to be like in 50 years’ time, we can better understand the right trees for the right locations, and hopefully make these woodlands more resilient in the long-term.”

The study, published in Science of the Total Environment , "Illuminating Patterns of Firefly Abundance Using Citizen Science Data and Machine Learning Models," identified the factors likely responsible for troubling declines in firefly populations across North America. To study these population changes, the research used a mix of field surveys from citizen scientists and advanced machine learning techniques to analyze over 24,000 surveys from the Firefly Watch citizen science initiative. Key Findings This research marks the first comprehensive attempt to apply a data-driven approach to understanding firefly population dynamics on a continental scale. Key findings from this new study indicate that fireflies, part of the beetle order, are sensitive to various environmental factors, from short-term weather conditions to longer climatic trends, including the number of growing-degree days related to temperature accumulations. "Subtle changes in climate patterns, especially related to temperature, are significantly impacting firefly breeding cycles and habitat quality," said Darin McNeil, study principal investigator and assistant professor of wildlife ecology and management. Christina Grozinger, publius vergilius maro professor of entomology at Penn State University, said while scientists previously knew that urbanization, agricultural intensification and climate change can affect biodiversity, less was known about how these complex factors interact and what people can do in their own backyards, towns and cities to support biodiversity. "In this study, we integrated large scale data sets on species abundance, land use, soil type, weather and climate using machine learning models to precisely model and predict firefly abundance patterns at the local scale across the eastern U.S.," Grozinger said. "We were very fortunate to have a multi-year citizen science data set that spanned more than 24,000 observations." The study underscores fireflies' sensitivity to climatic variables such as temperature and precipitation. Fireflies thrive in temperate conditions, with wet and warm summers creating the ideal breeding environment and cold winters supporting the survival of immature stages like eggs, larvae and pupae. However, as global temperatures rise, these conditions become less predictable and, often, less hospitable. Changes in precipitation patterns, another critical factor for firefly survival, have led to either overly dry conditions that reduce larval survival or excessively wet conditions that can flood breeding grounds and disrupt life cycles. "Artificial lights at night could disrupt firefly populations, possibly affecting both adult and larval stages," McNeil said. "Firefly larvae, which live in the soil, are particularly vulnerable to changes in light exposure and artificial light could alter their developmental cycles and survival rates. Firefly larvae, which are predatory, also require moist soil conditions because the humidity supports soft-bodied invertebrates like snails and slugs that firefly larvae use as prey." Urban growth, such as establishing impervious surfaces such as sidewalks, buildings and roads, poses a significant threat to firefly populations by invading natural habitats and decreasing available breeding areas. Light pollution from streetlights and commercial signs is particularly disruptive, as it interferes with the fireflies' bioluminescent communication essential for mating. The study indicates that fireflies are markedly less common in areas with significant nighttime light pollution. Agriculture impact on fireflies Certain agricultural practices also seem to contribute to the decline of fireflies. The extensive use of pesticides and herbicides has been linked to decreased firefly numbers, likely due to reduced prey availability and direct toxicity. This new study did not find a pesticide effect; in fact, certain agricultural areas supported some of the highest firefly densities, perhaps because some practices (e.g., livestock grazing) support meadow-like conditions that benefit fireflies. The study warns against increasing agricultural intensification, especially practices that reduce the organic debris and moist environments firefly larvae require to thrive. The paper reveals that the decline in firefly populations is not uniform across all climates or regions. Some species adapted to dryer environments or those with specific breeding patterns may be less affected by certain changes, whereas others are more vulnerable. This highlights the complexity of natural ecosystems and the need for tailored conservation strategies. The research team also made significant strides in identifying potential conservation measures to mitigate these impacts. These include reducing light pollution, preserving natural habitats and implementing wildlife-friendly agricultural practices that support fireflies. Fireflies' importance in the environment The decline of fireflies is more than the loss of a beloved natural spectacle; it signals broader ecological disruptions that could have cascading effects on other species and ecosystems. Fireflies play a role in the food web, serving as prey for some species and as predators for many invertebrates. Their disappearance could have unforeseen repercussions on local biodiversity. "As the study concludes, further research is encouraged, particularly in exploring the long-term trends of firefly populations and the efficacy of various conservation strategies" McNeil said. "Moving forward, focused studies that survey particular firefly species, rather than the firefly community as a whole, will be important. This approach will be crucial in ensuring that future generations can also enjoy the natural wonder of fireflies lighting up the night sky." "Each individual species has its own habitat requirement and things it needs to succeed," adds Bucknell University assistant professor of biology Sarah Lower, a noted firefly researcher. "With the citizen science data in this study, we're looking at fireflies in the aggregate, but we would like people in citizen science getting more training in species identification. If we can get species-level information, we can provide more specifics on species living in a particular area and how best to protect them." To create similar data sets for other firefly species, the research team is also leveraging technology and AI to develop automated monitoring systems through an NSF funded INSECT NET graduate training program. Individuals interested in learning more about the land use, weather and climate conditions in their locations can use Penn State's Beescape tool, which provides location-specific habitat quality scores for pollinators. This work was funded by the Penn State Insect Biodiversity Center, Penn State's Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences and Penn State's College of Agricultural Sciences via the USDA's National Institute of Food and Agriculture and Hatch Appropriations.

The study, published in Science Advances , sheds new light on the mechanisms driving the melting of ice shelves beneath the surface of the ocean, which have been unclear until now. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet has been losing mass in recent decades, contributing to global sea level rise. If it were to melt entirely, global sea levels would rise by around five meters. It's known that Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW), a water mass that is up to 4 ° C above local freezing temperatures, is flowing beneath the ice shelves in West Antarctica and melting them from below. Since so much of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet lies below sea level, it is particularly vulnerable to this warm water intrusion and may further retreat in the future. Previous observations and models have revealed that eastward undercurrents are transporting this warm water to cavities under the ice shelves. Despite its significance, the mechanism driving this undercurrent has remained elusive. Professor Alberto Naveira Garabato, from the University of Southampton, a coauthor of the paper, says: "Our findings suggest a positive feedback loop: as the ice shelf melts more rapidly, more freshwater is produced, leading to a stronger undercurrent and more heat being transported toward the ice shelves." "This cycle could speed up the melting of ice shelves, potentially making the West Antarctic Ice Sheet less stable in the future." Researchers from the University of California Los Angeles, MIT and the University of Southampton, used high-resolution simulations to investigate the dynamics of the undercurrent. Dr Alessandro Silvano from the University of Southampton, a coauthor on the study, said: "These simulations reveal that this deep current conveying warm waters toward the ice shelves is driven by the very same ice shelf melting that such warm waters cause." Their models suggest that when the warm CDW interacts with the ice shelf, it melts the ice and mixes with the lighter, melted freshwater. This water then rises through the layers of water above it. As it does, it spreads out and stretches the layer of CDW vertically. This stretching creates a swirling motion in the water. If there's a trough (a kind of underwater valley) near the coast, this swirling motion is then carried away from the ice shelf cavity toward the edge of the shelf by the movement of pressure within the water. This movement helps drive a current along the slope of the seafloor, directing more warm water toward the ice shelf. The underwater current forms a bit farther away from the ice shelf, so as more ice melts, the current gets stronger, carrying even more warm water toward the ice shelf. Dr Silvano added: "Scientific models that don't include the cavities under ice shelves are probably overlooking this positive feedback loop. Our results suggest it's an important factor that could affect how quickly ice shelves melt and how stable the West Antarctic Ice Sheet is over time." The research was funded by the National Science Foundation and the Natural Environment Research Council.

A first-of-its-kind study highlights how Florida can buffer itself against both climate change and population pressures by conserving the remaining 8 million acres of "opportunity areas" within the Florida Wildlife Corridor (FLWC). Currently, about 10 million acres of the expansive FLWC's 18 million acres are already conserved permanently. This superhighway of interconnected acres of wildlands, working lands and waters is the only designated statewide corridor in the United States, and a world-class adaption plan facing down ground zero of climate change in an already warm location. Spanning from Alabama to the Everglades, the FLWC not only protects endangered species like the Florida panther, but also brings economic and climate benefits to local communities. About 90 percent of Floridians live within 20 miles of the corridor. The new report, "The Florida Wildlife Corridor and Climate Change: Managing Florida's Natural and Human Landscapes for Prosperity and Resilience," is a joint project by Florida Atlantic University, Archbold Biological Station, Live Wildly Foundation and numerous collaborators. The report paints a holistic picture of how climate change and population growth will impact Florida's communities and natural resources, and how the FLWC, if it were fully enacted, can continue to moderate those impacts. The report offers hope that there are actions public and private partners can take to keep Florida's lands, waters and communities safe from the worst impacts of climate change. Protecting the FLWC not only shields wildlife from climate change and development, but also supports jobs, economies and ecosystem services such as drinking water and flood protection for people living both inside and outside the corridor. The FLWC, a critical conservation initiative aimed at preserving natural landscape connectivity across Florida, is the culmination of four decades of research, advocacy and land protection by agencies, landowners and nonprofit organizations that led to the passage of the FLWC Act in 2021. Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis signed the law on July 1, 2021, after votes of 115-0 in favor in the state House and 40-0 in favor in the Senate. In recent years, the Florida Legislature has appropriated more than $2.3 billion to help protect its lands. "State leadership has demonstrated its understanding of the deep link between clean water, healthy lands and a strong economy by supporting the creation of the Florida Wildlife Corridor and ongoing efforts," said Colin Polsky, Ph.D., lead author, founding director of the FAU School of Environmental, Coastal and Ocean Sustainability (ECOS) and a professor of geosciences in the Charles E. Schmidt College of Science. "Yet to date, the interactions between the corridor and climate change had not been examined. Findings from our report show substantial climate resilience benefits from the Florida Wildlife Corridor, yielding a much higher return on investment than originally thought." Among the report's key findings: "The Florida Wildlife Corridor provides a leading example of ambitious landscape conservation planning on a regional scale. Florida has long been a leader in habitat connectivity planning, and the state should be proud that its efforts inspire others around the world," said Joshua Daskin, Ph.D., project manager, and director of conservation, Archbold. "The corridor is an example of how public and private partners can come together to achieve mutual economic, social and environmental goals at the local and state levels." The FLWC climate report also provides policy recommendations for climate resilience such as limiting coastal, wetland and floodplain development in order to maintain flood mitigation services as well as supporting policies and legislation that integrate climate resilience into land use planning and conservation within the corridor. "Even though our built environments are responsible for many of the luxuries we enjoy in Florida, our urban design and development choices are fundamental to protecting us from fires, floods, hurricanes, sea level rise and even human health risks such as heat stroke and heat-related death," said John "Jay' Baldwin, Ph.D., co-lead author, a professor of biological sciences and associate dean for faculty development, FAU College of Science. "Our report provides a blueprint for planning that will fulfil the economic ambitions of growing Florida communities while mitigating climate change risks and protecting Florida's people, places and wildlife." The FLWC climate report collaborators include Florida State University, University of Central Florida, University of Florida, UF Center for Landscape Conservation Planning, University of South Florida, South Florida Water Management District, reTHINK Energy Florida, and Dover, Kohl & Partners Town Planning. The report is supported by funding from the Live Wildly Foundation.

More than 70% of this nation's rivers are non-perennial due to a combination of ancient landscape, dry climates, highly variable rainfall regimes, and human interventions that have altered riverine environments. An extensive review of current research incorporating geomorphology, hydrology, biogeochemistry, ecology and Indigenous knowledges identifies prevailing factors that shape water and energy flows in Australia's non-perennial rivers -- but the review also points to research deficiencies that must be addressed if these river systems are to be preserved and protected. "Australia relies on our rivers, and has a strong history of research to understand river flows and ecosystems and the human impacts on them. Now, we must address emerging threats to river systems due to climate change and other anthropogenic impacts," says lead author of the review, Dr Margaret Shanafield, from Flinders University's College of Science and Engineering. "We have to work together to tackle emerging threats to our rivers. If we are going to plug gaps in existing knowledge, which this review identifies, then a new style of inter-disciplinary scientific research is necessary to achieve the required outcomes." While dominant research themes in Australia focus on drought, floods, salinity, dryland ecology and water management, four other areas of research attention are urgently needed, namely: Addressing these areas through multi-disciplinary efforts supported by technological advances will provide a map for improved water research outcomes that the rest of the world can follow. "Australia is globally unique in its spread and diversity of non-perennial rivers spanning climates and landforms -- but most, if not all, of the classes of non-perennial rivers found in Australia also occur in other regions of the world with similar climates and geology," says Dr Shanafield. "Therefore, the evolving body of knowledge about Australian rivers provides a foundation for comparison with other dryland areas globally where recognition of the importance of non-perennial rivers is expanding." The review authors are concerned that Australian non-perennial river research has been driven by the needs of its inhabitants for survival, agriculture, resource economics, environmental concern and politics. "Considering the continent's ancient geological history and its harsh, arid climate, it comes as no surprise that significant attention has been directed toward water resource management during drought periods, the reduction of salinisation, and gaining insights into the intricate dynamics of the transient rivers that are a defining feature of central Australia," says the review. "The prevalence of prolonged drought periods has had a marked impact on driving research -- so it is critical to address the knowledge gaps this review has identified, given that increasing trends in hydrological droughts are projected to negatively impact streamflow not just in Australia, but also in South America, southern Africa, and the Mediterranean." The review authors -- a multi-disciplinary collective of scientists from across more than two dozen institutions and government departments -- say more investment in long-term hydrological monitoring is desperately needed to increase water management knowledge that can address the competing water needs of communities, agriculture, mining and ecosystems in a dry environment -- not only in Australia, but throughout the world. "We anticipate that changing global water fluxes and continued groundwater pumping will cause more of the world's rivers to become non-perennial, accelerating our need to understand these systems across many disciplines," says Dr Shanafield. "In turn, a more thorough understanding will help to underpin science-driven management of non-perennial rivers to both meet the needs of a growing Australian population while protecting the integrity of ecological systems."

Led by Dr. Melissa Rohde, who completed the study as part of her doctoral research in Dr. John Stella's Riparian Echohydrology Lab at ESF, the team used satellite imagery and groundwater monitoring data to identify thresholds of groundwater depth and seasonal change that can support sensitive ecosystems throughout California under the state's Sustainable Groundwater Management Act framework. "A vast majority of our planet's freshwater is groundwater, but we don't acknowledge or manage it sustainably, resulting in serious consequences for humans and natural ecosystems," said Dr. Rohde, now Principal at Rohde Environmental Consulting, LLC. "Groundwater is critical for many ecosystems, but their water requirements are rarely accounted for by water agencies and conservationists. To reconcile that, our study provides a simple and practical approach to detect ecological thresholds and targets that can be used by practitioners to allocate and manage water resources." Utilizing 38 years of Landsat satellite images (1985-2022) and statewide groundwater well data, the study examined impacts on key plant communities. A major challenge was to develop standardized metrics that can be applied across diverse ecosystems with site-specific water conditions. The team applied a common data transformation method in a new way to identify thresholds of vegetation greenness and groundwater depth over time that can determine groundwater needs for ecosystems, helping to inform decisions about water use and planning. "Groundwater-dependent ecosystems such as wetlands, floodplains, and riparian zones have a very outsized importance on biodiversity. Upwards of 80 to 90 percent of species in a general region may be dependent on these ecosystems in some form or another," said Dr. Stella, study co-author and Vice President for Research at ESF. "We applied a simple statistical approach to very large data sets to identify warning signs and conservation targets for a great diversity of ecosystem types." The vast geographic scope and long timeline covered by the study, allowed the team to evaluate how large-scale systems respond to major climate shocks such as the historical California drought that occurred from 2012 -- 2016, as well as where individual groundwater-dependent ecosystems can serve as resilient drought refugia. "This type of study, covering the entire state of California over close to 40 years, has really only become possible in the past few years and shows the promise for similar studies over a much larger geographic area using the approach pioneered by Dr. Rohde," remarked co-author, Dr. Dar Roberts from UCSB. It was discovered that during drought events, groundwater-dependent vegetation that maintains a connection to groundwater can serve as critical drought refugia for associated species, such as riparian birds or fish. However, when groundwater levels deepen beyond plants' rooting zones during drought, these safe havens can be lost. "A key takeaway from this study is that we can use what we know about how deep the roots of different types of plants tend to be to approximate what groundwater levels are needed to maintain ecosystem health," said co-author Dr. Christine Albano from DRI. "We found that vegetation was healthier where groundwater levels were within about 1 meter of maximum root depth, as compared to where groundwater was deeper." The research team is hopeful that their approach and findings can help inform water management decisions in California and beyond. "This study arms groundwater managers with an intuitive, site-specific measure that can provide a data-driven foundation to guide water allocation and ecosystem restoration efforts," said co-author and professor Kelly Caylor from UCSB. "Globally, there are increasing efforts to manage groundwater resources for multiple purposes, not only to support drinking water needs or high-value agriculture. Our work provides a sound basis on which to develop clear guidelines for how to manage groundwater to support a wide range of needs within drainage basins in California and beyond," said co-author Prof. Michael Singer from Cardiff University.

Assistant Professor Joanna Blaszczak and Postdoctoral Scholar Heili Lowman, both in the University'sCollege of Agriculture, Biotechnology & Natural ResourcesandGlobal Water Centerled the research, which was published in two separate journal articles. The preliminary work, led by Blaszczak andpublished in Ecology Letters last June, first studied six rivers and laid the groundwork and methodology for the second study, which Blaszczak hired Lowman to conduct, examining the 143 rivers. The results of that research were justpublished last month in PNAS (the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences). The research is unique because it estimates changes in biomass in rivers more frequently than ever before without needing to directly sample rivers. This is done by using both data from oxygen sensors placed in the rivers by the U.S. Geological Survey and a population model of algal and plant biomass -- similar to a human population model that models change in the number of people over time, but instead modeling the change in the amount of algae and plants. The oxygen sensors began collecting data in 2007, and the most recent Nevada-led study of 143 rivers includes some data that are for nine years running, among the longest such records on file for rivers across the globe. "Previously, you would have to go to a river and scrub rocks to measure the algae, and do that several times for an extended period of time in order to estimate changes in biomass growth and loss," Blaszczak said. "This is very time consuming, so the data have been extremely limited relative to how extensive our sensor networks are." Blaszczak said that with the oxygen sensors that take data as frequently as every five minutes, the team found that they could use statistical models to extract the amount of photosynthesis that occurs daily and estimate daily changes in the amount of biomass in a river over time. "The dissolved oxygen sensors show the peak during the day, and the low during the night, and from those patterns, you can estimate how much new algae and other biomass grew that day," she said. "With the sensors measuring data continuously in hundreds of rivers for years now, we can get a much bigger, clearer picture. The data is there, and we can use it to model the size of flood needed to disturb the biomass in a river, as well as the rate at which a river recovers from flood disturbances, which can help us manage rivers more effectively." Getting started In the first study, Blaszczak used two years of data from oxygen sensors placed in six rivers. She found that she could successfully use this data to model the flood threshold specific to a river that disturbed the underlying biomass, and that generally, the magnitude of flood necessary to disturb biomass and reduce ecosystem productivity was lower than the disturbance flow threshold necessary to mobilize river bed sediment, a metric of disturbance commonly used by those studying rivers. In other words, instead of estimating the disturbance of the river by the movement of the rocks on the river bed, this study used the biology -- the changes in algae and plant growth -- to quantify disturbance to the river and found that the biological disturbance threshold was lower. "The amount of biomass is important for water quality and a food source for everything that lives in a river," Blaszczak explained, "so it is more important than rock movement, in terms how a river ecosystem is affected by a disturbance." Blaszczak, a freshwater ecologist, began this work with Robert O. Hall Jr. of the Flathead Lake Biological Station at the University of Montana and enlisted the help of her colleague Assistant Professor Robert Shriver, a plant ecologist, for both research projects to complete the biomass growth modeling. Blaszczak, Shriver, and Lowman all conduct research as part of the College'sDepartment of Natural Resources & Environmental Science, as well as the College'sExperiment Stationresearch unit. The College's faculty often take interdisciplinary approaches to meet research challenges, Blaszczak said. Expanding out to a continental scale Blaszczak wanted to delve further by applying this approach to more rivers over a longer period of time to shed light on how various factors may be influencing both a river's thresholds for flood disturbance and its resilience to floods. Thus, she recruited Lowman to embark on the second, more extensive study. Lowman's research examined landscape and river characteristics that affected the rivers' resiliency to floods. "We've never had such great insight into the resilience of rivers, and because of the amount of data and our modeling, we now understand the natural variation in resilience, and that the widest rivers without dams upstream recover the most quickly," Lowman said. The fact that wide rivers without dams recover more quickly than wide rivers with dams upstream was not immediately obvious, she said, and is one example of how rivers can be affected and/or managed by our actions. Most of the rivers Lowman researched had three to four years of data, with some having as much as nine years, and a handful having less than a year. "Having three to four years' worth of data is way more than we've ever been able to use before," Lowman said. "And, we used rivers of various sizes with various climates and land characteristics." Besides wider rivers without dams being more resilient, Lowman said those rivers that had more frequent floods also tended to recover more quickly. "It could be that they have had a long history of frequent flooding, so their algae and plant communities have developed the ability to adapt to more frequent disturbance," she said. Overall, Lowman said the new model results are consistent with other previous approaches. But, she said that some sites took much longer, a month or more, to recover from floods than other sites, regardless of river size. "It might be the composition of the algal and plant communities, the structure of the river bed, or other factors," she said. "The thresholds and recovery times are very likely partially dependent on the slope, the grain size of the sediment, and possibly other factors that aren't as well documented. Those are some next steps for future research." Other researchers who contributed to the two studies besides the three Nevada researchers and Hall include, for the first study, Charles B. Yackulic of the U.S. Geological Survey's Southwest Biological Science Center; and for the second study, Yackulic, and Judson W. Harvey and Philip Savoy of the U.S. Geological Survey's Earth System Processes Division.

Erosion of creekbanks and marsh edges in areas with large otter populations has slowed by up to 90%, at a time when rising sea levels and stronger tidal currents should be causing the opposite effect. As erosion slows, marsh and streamside vegetation is rebounding and putting down densely matted root systems that can increasingly stand firm against flooding, or surging waves. Against all odds, the biophysical features essential for making the estuary a resilient coastal ecosystem are on the mend -- in large part, a study appearing Jan. 31 in Nature suggests, because of the sea otters' insatiable appetite for plant-eating marsh crabs. "It would cost millions of dollars for humans to rebuild these creekbanks and restore these marshes," said Brian Silliman, Rachel Carson Distinguished Professor of Marine Conservation Biology at Duke University's Nicholas School of the Environment, and Director of Duke RESTORE and Duke Wetland and Coasts Center. "The sea otters are stabilizing them for free in exchange for an all-you-can-eat crab feast." "(Remodeling a coastline) is usually something only large-scale physical forces, like hurricanes or extreme tidal flow changes, can do," said Silliman, who is the paper's senior author. "Our study, which draws on field experiments, modeling and before-and-after measurements, underscores the far-reaching benefits that can cascade through an ecosystem when a top predator is reintroduced," Silliman noted. "It begs the question: In how many other ecosystems worldwide could the reintroduction of a former top predator yield similar benefits?" West Coast estuaries were once an important foraging and nursery habitat for sea otters, who found an ample supply of tasty crabs and safe shelter for newborn otter pups in their protective marshes. To stay warm in frigid Pacific Ocean waters, adult otters need to eat about 25% of their body weight -- or around 20 to 25 pounds daily -- and crabs are one of their favorite meals. Sea otters had flourished in estuaries like Elkhorn Slough until fur traders hunted the local otter population nearly to extinction. Remaining survivors were driven out by agriculture, development and other human activities. Elkhorn Slough's crab population exploded. "Crabs eat salt marsh roots, dig into salt marsh soil, and over time can cause a salt marsh to erode and collapse. This had been happening at Elkhorn Slough for decades until sea otters recolonized the estuary in the mid-1980s," said the new study's lead author Brent Hughes, associate professor of biology at Sonoma State University and a former postdoctoral scholar in Silliman's lab at Duke. "After a few decades, in areas the sea otters had recolonized, salt marshes and creekbanks were becoming more stable again, despite rising sea levels, increased water flow from inland sources, and greater pollution," Hughes said. To test what role sea otters were playing in all this, the researchers conducted large-scale surveys across 13 tidal creeks and small-scale field experiments at five locations around the estuary for nearly a decade. Sea otters were excluded from some test sites but allowed to recolonize others. Measurements and observations, collected on the ground and by aerial photography, confirmed that at sites with large populations of otters, erosion had slowed by as much as 80% to 90% by the study's end, and some marshes were even expanding. Modelled simulations yielded similar outcomes. "The return of the sea otters didn't reverse the losses, but it did slow them to a point that these systems could restabilize despite all the other pressures they are subject to," Hughes said. "That suggests this could be a very effective and affordable new tool for our conservation toolkit." "There are important theoretical implications as well," Silliman adds. "This work overturns the well-established bottom-up paradigm that coastal geomorphology is governed by interactions between physical forces and plant structure. Our results unequivocally show that predators also play a keystone role in controlling the course of these tidal creeks." Hughes and Silliman conducted the new study with colleagues from Sonoma State, the University of California Santa Cruz, the University of California Santa Barbara, Nhydra Ecological Research, Moss Landing Marine Labs, U.S. Geological Survey, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Simon Fraser University, California Department of Water Resources, Monterey Bay Aquarium, and the University of Florida. Funding came from National Science Foundation CAREER grants (1652628 and 1445834) to Hughes and Silliman, respectively, and from the David H. Smith Research Conservation Fellowship, the Cedar Tree Foundation, the Rebecca and Steve Sooy Fellowship in Marine Mammals, the Stolarz Foundation, and the Lenfest Ocean Program.

These vegetated surfaces on the rooftops of buildings absorb excess storm water, reduce energy use by insulating buildings, and cool neighborhoods, tempering urban heat islands, while also creating urban habitats for plants, pollinators, and wildlife. But, in the U.S., green roofs are typically planted with non-native plants in sterile soils, and their effectiveness declines over time. A Dartmouth-led research team set out to determine if managing green roof soil microbes could boost healthy urban soil development, a methodology that could be applied to support climate resilience in cities. The team created an experimental green roof in Chicago to test how enhancing soil with native prairie microbes would change the soil microbial community over time. They were particularly interested in tracking the presence of beneficial mycorrhizal fungi. Mycorrhizal fungi are well-known to live in roots and support plants in a symbiotic underground relationship, delivering nutrients and water to them in exchange for plant sugars. Mycorrhizal fungi could be particularly helpful to plants in green roofs that have to endure high temperatures, intense sun, and periodic flooding. The researchers added soil rich with native mycorrhizal fungi obtained from a local restored prairie, referred to as "inoculum," to the experimental green roof's soil. They planted inoculated and untreated soil with native prairie plants and green roof succulents. Over two years, the team tracked changes in the mycorrhizal fungal community of the green roof. They also compared the green roof fungal species identified to those present in the inoculum and in the air. Their findings demonstrate that active management of green roof mycorrhizal fungi accelerates soil development faster than if mycorrhizal fungal communities are left to passively reestablish on their own. Green roofs treated with mycorrhizal fungi foster a more diverse soil community that is more likely to support long-term green roof sustainability, according to the results published in New Phytologist. "In this urban rooftop setting, we saw more diversity in the fungal communities of the inoculated soil," said lead author Paul Metzler, soil ecology lab manager in the Department of Environmental Studies at Dartmouth. "The long-term and consistent effects of the inoculum were quite surprising, as it's not necessarily something you would expect when working with such small microorganisms." Using a molecular technique called "DNA metabarcoding," which enables the identification of multiple organisms in one sample, the researchers could identify fungi present in the green roof soils as well as potential sources of these fungi. Many fungi came from the inoculum while other species got there through some other vector such as wind. The co-authors state that their study was different than most of its kind, as few studies track mycorrhizal community shifts over time post-inoculation and even fewer attempt to track the sources of species pools. The team also had a number of species in their green roof that likely arrived via unmeasured vectors such birds, insects, or even rats. Still, the most diverse fungal communities were those that had been treated with the inoculum, illustrating how mycorrhizal fungi could be used to improve soil health in green roofs. The results suggest that active management of soil microbial communities is effective and worth the effort and resources in cities. "Green roofs have a shelf life and they're not always the self-sustaining ecosystems that we think they are," says senior author Bala Chaudhary, an associate professor of environmental studies at Dartmouth. "They can be beneficial to urban areas but tend to lose their efficacy over time." While green roofs are marketed as "set it and forget it," the co-authors explain that ecological thought should be incorporated into their design, construction, and maintenance to maximize the benefits and role that green roofs play in the climate resilience of urban areas. "Our cities could be a window into the future," says Chaudhary. "They are experiencing the impacts of climate change -- warming temperatures and increased drought and flooding -- in an intensified way, which make them a great microcosm to study some of these impacts below ground."

Despite the incongruity, the car's autopilot grabs control and swerves into a ditch. Exasperated, the driver looks around the vicinity, finding no other vehicles as the incoming danger disappears from the screen. Moments later, the real threat emerges -- a group of hijackers jogging toward the immobilized vehicle. This scene seems destined to become a common plot point in Hollywood films for decades to come. But due to the complexities of modern automotive detection systems, it remains firmly in the realm of science fiction. At least for the moment. Engineers at Duke University, led by Miroslav Pajic, the Dickinson Family Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Tingjun Chen, assistant professor of electrical and computer engineering, have now demonstrated a system they've dubbed "MadRadar" for fooling automotive radar sensors into believing almost anything is possible. The technology can hide the approach of an existing car, create a phantom car where none exists or even trick the radar into thinking a real car has quickly deviated from its actual course. And it can achieve this feat in the blink of an eye without having any prior knowledge about the specific settings of the victim's radar, making it the most troublesome threat to radar security to date. The researchers say MadRadar shows that manufacturers should immediately begin taking steps to better safeguard their products. The research will be published in 2024 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, taking place February 26 -- March 1 in San Diego, California. "Without knowing much about the targeted car's radar system, we can make a fake vehicle appear out of nowhere or make an actual vehicle disappear in real-world experiments," Pajic said. "We're not building these systems to hurt anyone, we're demonstrating the existing problems with current radar systems to show that we need to fundamentally change how we design them." In modern cars that feature assistive and autonomous driving systems, radar is typically used to detect moving vehicles in front of and around the vehicle. It also helps to augment visual and laser-based systems to detect vehicles moving in front of or behind the car. Because there are now so many different cars using radar on a typical highway, it is unlikely that any two vehicles will have the exact same operating parameters, even if they share a make and model. For example, they might use slightly different operating frequencies or take measurements at slightly different intervals. Because of this, previous demonstrations of radar-spoofing systems have needed to know the specific parameters being used. "Think of it like trying to stop someone from listening to the radio," explained Pajic. "To block the signal or to hijack it with your own broadcast, you'd need to know what station they were listening to first." In the MadRadar demonstration, the team from Duke showed off the capabilities of a radar-spoofing system they've built that can accurately detect a car's radar parameters in less than a quarter of a second. Once they've been discovered, the system can send out its own radar signals to fool the target's radar. In one demonstration, MadRadar sends signals to the target car to make it perceive another car where none actually exist. This involves modifying the signal's characteristics based on time and velocity in such a way that it mimics what a real contact would look like. In a second and much more complicated example, it fools the target's radar into thinking the opposite -- that there is no passing car when one actually does exist. It achieves this by delicately adding masking signals around the car's true location to create a sort of bright spot that confuses the radar system. "You have to be judicious about adding signals to the radar system, because if you simply flooded the entire field of vision, it'd immediately know something was wrong," said David Hunt, a PhD student working in Pajic's lab. In a third kind of attack, the researchers mix the two approaches to make it seem as though an existing car has suddenly changed course. The researchers recommend that carmakers try randomizing a radar system's operating parameters over time and adding safeguards to the processing algorithms to spot similar attacks. "Imagine adaptive cruise control, which uses radar, believing that the car in front of me was speeding up, causing your own car to speed up, when in reality it wasn't changing speed at all," said Pajic. "If this were done at night, by the time your car's cameras figured it out you'd be in trouble." Each of these attack demonstrations, the researchers emphasize, were done on real-world radar systems in actual cars moving at roadway speeds. It's an impressive feat, given that if the spoofing radar signals are even a microsecond off the mark, the fake datapoint would be misplaced by the length of a football field. "These lessons go far beyond radar systems in cars as well," Pajic said. "If you want to build drones that can explore dark environments, like in search and rescue or reconnaissance operations, that don't cost thousands of dollars, radar is the way to go." This research was supported by the Office of Naval Research (N00014-23-1-2206, N00014-20-1-2745), the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (FA9550-19-1-0169), the National Science Foundation (CNS-1652544, CNS-2211944), and the National AI Institute for Edge Computing Leveraging Next Generation Wireless Networks (Athena) (CNS-2112562).

By studying plant cell walls -- which are to plants what skeletons are to humans -- we can reveal the composition of how leaves and stems of plants are actually constructed. This is exactly what a team of University of Copenhagen researchers has done, in a large comprehensive study. In doing so, they have created something truly novel: a large "reference catalogue" of plant cell wall compositions from 287 species, broadly representing the entire plant kingdom. "Flowering plants have succeeded in adapting to the most unwelcoming and harshest environments in the world, in part due to the construction of their cell walls. They provide the plants with both mechanical structure and ensure the internal transport of water. Plant cell walls are composed of many different carbohydrates, that each have a unique structure and function -- you can think of them like toy building blocks." says botanist Louise Isager Ahl from the Natural History Museum of Denmark, and continues: "Although humans rely heavily on plants and their carbohydrates for food, building materials, clothing and medicine, our knowledge of their fine structure is still quite limited. We know that carbohydrates are some of the most complex chemical structures in nature, but how they are assembled, how they work and how they have evolved over the past several million years is still largely unknown." By analysing leaf and stem tissues from 287 different plant species, the researchers investigated the connection between the ultra-complex plant carbohydrates and their evolutionary history, growth forms and habitats. The species included in the study represent the most important evolutionary branches of the plant tree of life, from algae to vascular plants. Genetic heritage more influential than environment The researchers' hypothesis was that growth form and habitat would also affect plant cell wall structure. They expected, for example, to find similarities in the cell wall composition between species that were genetically distant but living in the same environment. This turned out not to be the case: "As an example, in a typical Danish beech forest, you will find beech trees, anemones, various grasses, and other plants. Since they share the same habitat, it would be easy to think that their construction is also similar. However, our analyses show that the carbohydrate compositions of their cell walls are vastly different. And when we compare carbohydrate compositions with the plants' family history, habitat and growth form, we can see that it is primarily their family history that determines their individual structures," explains Louise Isager Ahl. "The carbohydrate composition of a plant is thereby more closely related to where it is placed in a family tree than to its habitat and growth form. Here, heritage plays a more important role than environment," adds Professor Peter Ulvskov from the Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences. Conversely, this also means that species that morphologically resemble each other or live in the same type of habitat can be constructed in very different ways. One good example of this relates to a pair of succulents studied by the scientists. "Among others, we examined two succulent species, the jade plant ( Crassula ovata ) and jade necklace ( Peperomia rotundifolia ), both are common living room plants where the leaves resemble one another. However, they belong to two different families, and when we look at their carbohydrates, it turns out that the two plants are built very differently too," says Louise Isager Ahl. Targeted plant breeding The scientists hope that others will make use of their large dataset, which is freely available, together with their recently published article in the journal Plant, Cell & Environment .The catalogue of cell wall compositions could, for example, be used as a starting point for targeted breeding of crop plants. "Even though the cell walls of plants are an important component in our food, animal feed, textiles and other materials, we have yet to target our breeding of cultivated plants to improve their cell wall properties. For example, cell walls determine to a large extent the digestibility of plant material. Targeted breeding of cell walls could increase both the quality and sustainability of animal feed. Now there is a catalogue to start from," says Peter Ulvskov. Furthermore, the researchers believe that the dataset is ideal when it comes to research into climate-resilient plants. "Our data can be used as an encyclopedia orreference database for researchers when they, for example, want to plan a study on a plant group they have not previously worked on. For example if you want to study how plant species in the rain forest, desert or on the heath react to environmental influences such as drought, high CO 2 levels or floods -- the dataset can be used as a benchmark," says Louise Isager Ahl. This type of knowledge is important because climatic changes will probably change plant habitats: "All of the climatic and environmental changes that we are now facing are challenging the planet's plants, and thus humans as well. Because we are deeply dependent on how plants function. If we are going to develop more resilient plants, it is important that we understand the mechanisms by which they survive or succumb. Here, understanding their building blocks, in the form of cell walls and carbohydrates plays a key role," concludes Peter Ulvskov. ABOUT THE STUDY

In recent years, the concept of rewilding has captured the attention of conservationists, who see it as a promising and cost-effective tool to combat biodiversity loss and restore ecosystems. The Oder Delta area, which spans the northern border between Germany and Poland, is particularly suitable for the natural comeback of wildlife. It comprises diverse natural habitats, like riparian forests, standing- and flowing waters, open and semi-open inland dunes, and heathlands, and is surrounded by diverse landscapes of forests, rivers, and wetlands. To measure public sentiment towards rewilding in the Oder Delta, a team of researchers led by the German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) and the Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg (MLU) carried out an online, choice experiment survey. Given the geographic position of the area across both Germany and Poland, the survey offered a unique opportunity to investigate differences in attitudes between the two countries. Approximately 1,000 respondents from each country were presented with different scenarios describing the ecological status of the Oder Delta in 2050 as a result of various management interventions. The scenarios included, for example, the conditions of rivers and forests and the presence of large animals such as elk, lynx, or wolves. Beyond the "status quo" option, an intensification of land use in the region, respondents were presented with two alternative scenarios with varying biodiversity benefits. Importantly, only the status quo option came at no additional cost. The two alternative options were associated with tax payments to fund the necessary interventions, meaning that respondents were faced with a trade-off: an increase in nature benefits went hand in hand with an increase in taxes. "This allowed us to calculate the respondents' willingness to pay for different management interventions in the Oder Delta region," says lead author Rowan Dunn-Capper from iDiv and MLU. "This helps us understand broader preferences for rewilding." Strong preferences for rewilding The study revealed a significant appetite for rewilding initiatives at the national scale, particularly for the presence of large animals, such as wolves, lynx, elk, and bison in the Oder Delta. Willingness to pay for scenarios in which large animal species were present was almost three times larger than for restoring the most natural landscape elements. "To find such preference was surprising given the often-negative portrayal of large animal species, notably the wolf, in the popular media," says Dunn-Capper. "It suggests the public may be more welcoming of wildlife return than first thought." This preference was also true for forests and agriculture: respondents in Germany as well as in Poland had a strong preference for the most natural rewilding levels with minimum human intervention on the ecosystem. Additionally, the fact that results for Germany and Poland were broadly comparable indicates that preferences for rewilding hold across political and cultural contexts. Locals are less enthusiastic about rewilding Survey participants living near the Oder Delta (within 100km)did not show the same appetite for rewilding initiatives. Local respondents showed a preference for large herbivores, such as elk and bison, but were less enthusiastic about the presence of large carnivores, like wolves. Similarly, local respondents showed contrasting preferences for certain rewilding interventions in rivers and agricultural landscapes compared to the national sample. For example, a significant share of local respondents were not willing to pay for scenarios in which flooding regimes were fully restored in the Oder Delta. "This underscores the intricacies of conservation planning and highlights the importance of local input to foster biodiversity democracy, this is the management of natural resources as a democratic process," says senior author Professor Henrique Pereira, head of Biodiversity Conservation at MLU and iDiv. "Generally, our findings support rewilding as a novel ecosystem restoration approach that has public acceptance to become mainstream across Europe."

A study published recently in Scientific Reports reveals how human activity affects biodiversity among arthropods and how nonbiological factors, such as daily temperature swings and proximity to the ocean, affect arthropod biodiversity in urban areas. The research uncovered a few surprises and points to ways homeowners, landscapers and urban planners can ensure a healthy mix of these small but vital neighbors. Community science aids study Biodiversity refers to the variety of life forms in any given area. Generally speaking, greater biodiversity makes for a healthier, more resilient ecosystem. In urban settings, high biodiversity has been linked to benefits such as better air quality, decreased risk of flooding and even improved mental health for humans. To assess arthropod biodiversity and related factors in the Los Angeles basin, scientists at the USC Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences collaboratied with researchers at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County's BioSCAN project. BioSCAN is a community science project run by the Natural History Museum and supported by about 80 volunteers who helped place small, tent-like net structures called Malaise traps in backyards, gardens and other locations throughout greater Los Angeles. From these traps, scientists collected flying arthropods such as bees, flies and moths. They also hand-collected spiders in those same locations. Unforeseen findings in arthropod biodiversity During the year-long project, museum staff tallied the arthropods to determine the diversity of groups living in each area. The results were surprising. "In general, we thought most arthropods would be similarly affected by environmental factors such as land covered by asphalt or concrete and temperature fluctuations over a 24-hour cycle," said lead researcher Melissa Guzman, Gabilan Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences and Quantitative and Computational Biology at USC Dornsife. "Instead, we found an unexpectedly large range of responses to factors such as these, both within closely related groups and across different groups." For example, the prevalence of hard surfaces such as concrete and asphalt had contrasting impacts on different insect populations. While it increased the diversity of fruit flies of the Drosophilidae family, it seemed to decrease the diversity of the crane flies in the Tipuloidea superfamily. Diversity of spiders, interestingly, was high around hard-covered land. The researchers also found that temperature appeared to influence diversity of fungus gnats in the family Mycetophilidae as well as Syrphidae, a family comprising bee-like hover flies. Diversity among these insects decreased as the mercury rose. The researchers speculate that higher temperatures in summertime dry up plants eaten by aphids, a food source for many hover flies. Also, non-native honeybees forage more in higher temperatures and so compete for the same foods some hover flies need. Knowing how diversity among various species is linked to factors such as land value, land cover and temperature can help urban planners and developers adjust their projects in ways that boost biodiversity and bring its benefits to all Angelenos. Many new species discovered Brian Brown, entomology curator at the Natural History Museum, pointed to another surprising result that delighted the researchers: The project turned up many species of arthropods scientists didn't know lived in the L.A. area, including close to 50 species previously unknown to science. "Based on that, we have a new understanding of what the biodiversity of Los Angeles is like in terms of insects," he said. "So instead of the 3,500 or 4,000 species that we previously thought, now we're thinking there are close to 20,000 species living here in the 'city of insects.'" The researchers credit the L.A. community members who participated with the BioSCAN project as vital to understanding the region's biodiversity and, therefore, key to conservation efforts. As a tribute, they named each new-found species after a participating family. Findings have lessons for humans Despite some study challenges -- it doesn't account for seasonal variations in rainfall and temperature, for example -- the researchers say the findings point to ways Angelenos can ensure they increase arthropod biodiversity. "Prioritizing green areas and reducing the use of pesticides would go a long way," Guzman says. "And urban planners and builders could include microhabitats designed to allow a greater variety of species to thrive." While the study centered on the L.A. region, the researchers believe similar results would apply to other, similar communities, guiding land developers and homeowners in many cities in western North America. About the study In addition to Guzman, USC Dornsife researchers on the study include co-first authors Jayme Lewthwaite and Teagan Baiotto, Yan Yin Cheung, Austin Baker, Charles Lehnen and Vaughn Shirey. In addition to Brown, Natural History Museum researchers include Terrence McGlynn, also of California State University Dominguez Hills, and Lisa Gonzalez. Emily Hartop of Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin, Peter Kerr of CDFA Plant Pest Diagnostics Center and Eric Wood of California State University Los Angeles are also authors.

The value of wide beaches and dunes Beaches and dunes are vital to society. They protect us from flooding, are an important source for our drinking water, and are an important habitat for numerous plant and animal species. They are also indispensable when we spend a day at the beach or walk through the dunes. When beaches and dunes are given enough space, they can fulfill all these functions. But, if dune areas become too narrow, natural flood protection, drinking water extraction and biodiversity are threatened. Yet beaches and dunes are increasingly squeezed by infrastructure on the one hand and rising sea levels on the other, write researchers from the Netherlands Institute for Sea Research, University of Groningen, Utrecht University, TU Delft and the Dutch Forestry Commission in the leading journal Nature Communications. A quarter million measurements To map this coastal squeeze, the researchers combined measurement data from previous work of TU Delft with Open Street Map data. They then measured the straight-line distance from the coastline to the nearest paved road or building. They took this measurement every kilometer, along all the sandy beaches in the world, yielding a total of 235,469 measurements. Less than 400 meters These measurements showed that human infrastructure is generally located very close to the sea. On average, the first building or paved road is found at 390 meters from the sea. In the densely populated Netherlands this is even at 210 meters, and in France the space is even tighter with 30 meters from the sea. Of all continents, Europe appears to have the most trapped beaches and dunes with an average distance of 130 meters, while Oceania is the least squeezed with an average distance of 2.8 km. Rising sea levels In the future, coastal squeeze is likely to increase worldwide. Rising sea levels will further narrow the space between buildings and the sea. In a natural situation, beaches and dunes would migrate inland, but buildings and roads impede this process. Therefore, researchers expect that 23 to 30 percent of beaches and dunes will be washed away or drowned by 2100. Protection Hopeful is the important role of nature protection. The researchers found that, when dune areas have a protected status, buildings and roads are found to be four times more distant than in unprotected areas. However, currently only 16% of the world's sandy coasts are protected. The researchers therefore emphasize that it is important to better protect beaches and dunes.

David Vandercruyssen, Simon Baker, David Howard and George Aggidis from the School of Engineering say that tidal range schemes are vital to protect habitats, housing and businesses from a rising sea level estimated to be over one metre within 80 years. Postgraduate researcher David Vandercruyssen said: "High tides can be limited to existing levels simply by closing sluices and turbines and existing low tide levels can be maintained by pumping." Professor George Aggidis, Head of Energy Engineering, said: "Development of estuarine barrages has been hampered by misconceptions about their operation and fears of disturbance of the ecologically sensitive intertidal areas. "Our studies show that with modern technology and operating procedures, estuarine barrages are the only practical way to protect these vital habitats. Coastal lagoons have also been proposed for several locations around Britain's coast. Schemes will provide jobs in construction and manufacturing for generations to come as well as opportunities for transport, communication, conservation and recreation. In the long-term they will provide reliable power with reduced costs." Their research, published in Energy , follows on from earlier Lancaster University research into a combined tidal range electricity generation and cost model demonstrating the viability of tidal range energy in the UK. This showed how it is possible to maintain the full tidal range within existing dams or weirs. Professor Aggidis said: "Great Britain has the second largest tidal range in the world and major barrages have been considered since Victorian times. Globally, there are two large scale schemes currently in operation, La Rance in France which was completed in 1967 and Lake Sihwa in South Korea from 2011; both schemes generate significant quantities of cheap sustainable electricity."

While global carbon emission reduction is imperative, local measures could be the key to the islands outpacing sea levels, they argue today in the journal Trends in Ecology & Evolution . "Far from being doomed, in their natural state most coral atoll islands could adapt to sea level rise," says Dr Sebastian Steibl from the University of Auckland in New Zealand, lead author of the study. "This paper is a global call to identify and quantify the best measures for restoring atoll island growth." The world's 320 tropical coral atolls are made up of thousands of islands and are a treasure trove of biodiversity, homes to millions of turtles and seabirds. These islands are naturally growing up to 1 cm a year by accreting sediment -- enough to outpace most predictions of sea level rise. Ecologically restoring this natural process holds the key to climate change resilience for the islands, says the team of scientists, who are already trialling restoration methods on atolls such as Tetiaroa and Palmyra in the eastern Pacific Ocean and Aldabra in the western Indian Ocean. While densely populated islands such as in the Maldives will still need human-engineered solutions most coral atoll islands are sparsely inhabited and excellent candidates for restoration, the scientists say. "Restoration of atoll island ecosystems is a proven conservation action that can significantly improve the health of the surrounding coral reef habitat," says island resilience scientist and co-author Dr Alex Wegmann from The Nature Conservancy in California. The climate damage fund announced at COP28 is one potential mechanism for funding local restoration. "Funding restoration work would empower communities to take back ownership of their futures," says co-author Professor James Russell, a conservation biologist at the University of Auckland People living on coral atolls are largely ignored when industrialised nations negotiate responses to climate change. "Local knowledge alongside cutting edge science needs to be included in atoll restoration programs," says cultural director of the Tetiaroa Society and co-author Hinano Teavai-Murphy, "because the traditional knowledge of Oceanian people has always been about respecting and preserving the connected marine and terrestrial systems."

However, the very attributes that have enabled epiphytes to thrive in forest canopies are now making them vulnerable to both natural and human-caused disturbances, according to Nalini Nadkarni, the University of Utah biologist known for her pioneering work studying and conserving treetop ecosystems. In a study published this month, Nadkarni found these vital plants are under more and more pressure as a result of rapid environmental change, and proposes specific actions for preserving these fascinating plants. "This synthesis revealed the exceptional vulnerability to the increasing levels of disturbances -- such as climate change and deforestation -- on the abundance diversity and connectivity of canopy-dwelling plants around the globe," she said. "Although we categorize the disturbances with greatest negative effects on canopy plants as 'natural,' as hurricanes and wildfire, human activities are increasing the severity and frequency of those in the USA and around the world." Nadkarni's latest paper reviews the available science on epiphyte communities and categorizes the drivers and consequences of and societal responses to drought, wind, insects, wildfire, logging and other disturbances. Her findings should serve as a wake-up call to land managers and others interested in preserving the health of the world's woodlands. "Across all impacts, disturbance agents were significantly more likely to lead to negative, rather than positive, effects in both tropical and temperate locales," Nadkarni wrote in the paper posted Oct. 11 in the journal New Phytologist . The study examined 255 previous papers on ecological disturbances impacting epiphytes in 58 countries. Nadkarni's explorations in forest canopies have inspired a generation of naturalists, drawing scientific attention to habitats that are only now becoming well understood. And epiphytes are the main attraction. "Communities of plants that live in rainforest canopies -- ferns, orchids and bromeliads -- play 'keystone roles' in maintaining biodiversity, fostering critical interactions for pollination and seed dispersal and maintaining healthy nutrient cycles, even though their biomass is small relative to whole forests," she said. "Many of them have been cultivated by people for centuries because of their beauty and the ways they connect us to aesthetically and spiritually to nature." Epiphytes display an astonishing array of diversity, with 28,000 known species. Mosses are the most prevalent kind. "They don't have roots that go into trunks or to the forest floor, but rather it is their leaves that are adapted to intercept the dissolved nutrients that come to them in the form of mist and fog," Nadkarni said in an impassioned 2009 TED talk. "Underneath these live epiphytes, as they die and decompose, they actually construct an arboreal soil…They have a tremendous capacity for holding onto nutrients and water," she continued. "If you pull back on those mats of epiphytes, what you'll find underneath them are connections, networks of what we call canopy roots. These are not epiphyte roots. These are roots that emerged from the trunks and branches of the host trees themselves. And so those epiphytes are actually paying the landlord a bit of rent in exchange for being supported high above the forest floor." Her new review found that forest fragmentation was the most frequently cited disturbance agent, followed by climate change, epiphyte harvesting, extreme events, agriculture, hurricanes and forestry activities. "Surprisingly, relative to human disturbances (e.g., deforestation, forest fragmentation), natural disturbances (e.g., hurricanes, floods, wildfire) were more likely to lead to negative effects on epiphytes," the paper reported. To reduce harm to epiphytes, land managers should take specific actions, such as keeping large, old trees in forestry operations, clearing only small areas to harvest epiphytes and protecting large sections of forests. They should also use epiphytes as indicators to determine how healthy an environment is and involve local communities in forest management. In the future, Nadkarni concluded, it's crucial to share these findings with policymakers and land managers, so we can work together to protect epiphytes and the valuable roles they play in our forests.

"Freshwater habitats in general are getting saltier for a number of reasons, including road salt and agricultural runoff, extraction of coal and natural gas, drought, and sea level rise," says David Buchwalter, professor of toxicology at NC State and corresponding author of the research. "Freshwater insects and other organisms that live in these systems are used as indicators of the ecosystem's health. When these systems get saltier, we see that insect diversity decreases, but we aren't sure why." Aquatic animals (including insects and crustaceans) must constantly maintain the correct balance of water and salts within their body -- a process called osmoregulation. Theoretically, the most favorable environment for aquatic animals would be one where external salinity levels are close to those inside the animal. That way the animal doesn't have to work as hard to maintain osmoregulation. However, the opposite seems to be true for freshwater insects -- higher salinity is always associated with increased rates of ion uptake in insects, but it is also associated with developmental delays or death. "We thought that freshwater insects might be shifting so much of their energy toward osmoregulation in saltier environments that they cannot grow or thrive," Buchwalter says. "So we measured the metabolic rates of crustaceans and insects in dilute and saline environments to see if metabolic responses to salinity were similar." The team looked at three types of freshwater animals -- two species of gammarid, or "scud," which is a small freshwater crustacean; one freshwater snail; and three aquatic insect species. In the first test, they measured the animals' metabolism by placing them in waters with different concentrations of salt ions and looking at their rates of oxygen consumption. They observed that more dilute conditions made the crustaceans and snail breathe harder, increasing their metabolism, while insects' metabolic rates were constant regardless of salinity. Next, the team looked at whether an increase in breathing rates was linked to the transport of a particular ion. Radioactive isotopes of the salt ions calcium and sodium allowed the researchers to measure how much and how quickly the animals took up different ions. The researchers found that calcium was the key driver of non-insects' increased metabolism in lower salinity. In other words, the crustaceans and snail worked harder to transport the calcium ions they required in an environment where calcium was harder to find. In contrast, the insects' metabolic rates remained constant in both saline and dilute environments, even though they had a higher calcium ion transport rate in the saline environment. Insects seem to have very little demand for calcium; in fact, previous research has shown that excess calcium is potentially toxic to them. The researchers think that the animals' use of internal energy, or active transport, when moving the salts could be the explanation. "When we see non-insects' metabolisms increase in dilute environments, it could be due to the fact that they have to work harder to take in more calcium," Buchwalter says. "And while it seems counterintuitive, the opposite is true for insects who are working harder in a more saline environment to maintain equilibrium, although their respiration rates don't increase. Instead, they appear to utilize resources that would otherwise be dedicated to growth and development to 'undo' excessive ion uptake when things get saltier. "Moving salt ions has an energy cost to the animal," Buchwalter says. "So for freshwater insects, the idea that organisms should thrive in environments that are close to their internal salinity is wrong. Additionally, their low demand for calcium may help them thrive in very dilute environments where insects typically dominate the ecology. In contrast, low calcium appears to be stressful for the crustaceans and snail in this study. It is fascinating that species living in the same habitats can have such different physiologies." Future work will explore whether these physiological differences are based on the ancestry of the organisms tested, or the use of calcium in their exoskeletons/shells. The work appears in the Journal of Experimental Biology and was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant IOS 1754884. First author and Ph.D. candidate Jamie Cochran was supported by a Goodnight Doctoral Fellowship. Catelyn Banks, formerly a student at the North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics, also contributed to the work.

Vulnerable coastlines Unfortunately, precisely in these rural densely populated Asian regions, mangroves have in the past been cleared to free up land for other uses such as aquaculture. This has made these coasts vulnerable to rapid erosion. Restoring mangroves seems a logical solution to reverse this process and protect these densely populated coastlines. However, this requires understanding if mangroves can cope with extreme rates of relative sea level rises, as experienced in these subsiding areas. Since 2015 NIOZ researcher Celine van Bijsterveldt visited Indonesia regularly during her studies and her Phd. "I saw how much the people suffered from coastal erosion and frequent inundation," Van Bijsterveldt says. "To be able to answer if mangroves can help, I started with obtaining reliable measurements of the subsidence rate. This is extremely complicated if you work so remote." Local land subsidence causes high relative sea level rise "Typically, measuring subsidence requires expensive complicated equipment," says Van Bijsterveldt. "As such instruments are lacking in these remote areas, we developed two novel and low-cost methods to approximate relative sea-level rise. In the mangroves we measured the sea level rise by simple pressure gages, that are normally used to measure tides. And in the village we analyzed how often people increased the height of the floor and the roof of their houses. Doing so we demonstrate how 20 km of rural coastline and its vegetated foreshore, neighboring a rapidly subsiding city, were experiencing alarming rate of sea level rise." Surprisingly, villages experienced much higher rates of sea level rise than mangrove forests, with dramatic consequences for local communities. Two ways local communities 'cope' with high relative sea level rise "By interviews, we learned that local communities may respond in two ways to the experienced sea level rise: fight (keep the water out by raising the house) or flight (move further land inward or elsewhere)" says Van Bijsterveldt. Flood-prone coastal communities may not always be able to move to higher grounds. Financial and/or social limitations, such as landownership and income source (for instance fisheries) may bind families to the coast. Nature-based solutions make mangrove restoration possible Mangroves offer coastal protection by preventing coastal erosion and attenuating waves moving to the coast. Such protection will however only work if there is enough mangrove forest to do the job. Van Bijsterveldt's research discovered that mature mangroves showcased an extreme high level of tolerance to subsidence and the resulting 'experienced' rapid sea level rise. But an adequate supply of sediment needs to be available along the shore. "Unfortunately, the latter is not the case near Semarang" says professor Helmi from Diponegoro University. "But this finding is very promising for many less fast subsiding rural areas along muddy coast, as we can find in Indonesia and many other places around the world." Outlook for strongly subsiding areas Overall, present study highlights the urgency of addressing land subsidence as a critical factor influencing coastal vulnerability. In areas where the experienced relative sea level rise caused by subsidence is not compensated by sufficient sediment supply, the mangroves' ability to stabilize the coastline will deteriorate. This will result in the gradual inland migration of the mangrove forest. Rural communities are left with little choice but to also retreat landward. In this respect, the present study offers a future perspective on the fate of global coastal communities under accelerated global sea level rise. "This study provides a glimpse into the future for poor rural areas on the coast struggling with experienced accelerated sea level rise due to subsidence" says professor Helmi from Diponegoro University. "By showing the intricate dynamics between mangroves and their environment, Van Bijsterveldt's findings contribute to develop effective strategies for mitigating the impacts of these pressing issues." International and interdisciplinary collaboration "This glimpse in the future has only been possible because of the unique international and interdisciplinary collaboration" says professor Tjeerd Bouma from NIOZ and Utrecht University. "Only by bringing together ecologists, coastal physicists and sociologists from Indonesia and the Netherlands, it was possible to get an integrated perspective on the whole coast. We are also grateful for the active support of NGO's and companies willing to invest in development of critical knowledge for climate proofing our coasts." This research project is part of a collaboration of the Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research (NIOZ), Utrecht University, Wageningen University, Deltares, TU Delft, Wetlands International and the Indonesian Diponegoro University. The research was financed by NWO-domain Applied and Engineering Sciences (project# 14753), and co-financed by Boskalis Dredging and Marine experts, Van Oord Dredging and Marine Contractors bv, Deltares, Witteveen & Bos and Wetlands International.

The University of Queensland-led study shows current conservation efforts typically target biodiversity protection whilst minimising conflict with economic interests, while failing to consider the huge benefits provided by ecosystems. Alvise Dabalà, now at the University of the Azores and whose Masters project at UQ formed the basis of this study, said human activities, such as deforestation and coastal development have led to extensive mangrove loss across the globe. "They protect infrastructure and communities from storms, sequester carbon, and provide fisheries with nursing grounds, so their rapid destruction is devastating to witness," Mr Dabalà said. "As it stands, current conservation efforts just aren't doing enough to take advantage of these services." The team is using the United Nations' Global Biodiversity Framework , which recommends an increase in protected areas to 30 per cent of the world as the basis of their proposal. Researchers are recommending an optimised conservation planning perspective that operates within this framework and puts more emphasis on these ecosystem services. "It's somewhat of a juggling act, where we have to consider the trade-offs between biodiversity protection, economic conflicts, and ecosystem services," Mr Dabalà said. "But if done properly, this target has the potential to safeguard AU$25.6 billion of coastal property value, globally. "It would also protect 6.1 million coastal-dwelling people against the impacts of flooding, and safeguard over one billion tonnes of sequestered carbon. "In Australia alone, we've identified priority areas in Northern Queensland, Darwin and East Arnhem in the Northern Territory, and between Pilbara and Kimberley in Western Australia. "Expanding Australian mangrove protection would be particularly beneficial for carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation as they stand out as some of the most diverse, carbon-rich mangrove forests." UQ's Professor Anthony Richardson said to achieve these outcomes boils down to a shift in perspective. "In some areas of the world, we recognise that human pressure could be so high that the value of ecosystem services would not compensate for the loss and could result in complications in implementing protection," Professor Richardson said. "However, for multiple ecosystems, including mangroves, we've quantified the benefits associated with considering the services these ecosystems provide -- the figures are undeniable. "We know that long-term gains from biodiversity protection are often greater than short-term gains from anthropogenic activities, so this shift in thinking must happen soon." Professor Richardson said developing biodiversity and ecosystem services data should be a priority to incorporate into applied conservation plans. "Implementation of these plans should then follow different conservation practices that target local communities' needs specifically," he said. "Moving forward, decision-makers and other stakeholders need to focus on protected area implementation, management, and monitoring to provide solid conservation outcomes."

Reconstructing early human colonization on Mediterranean islands is challenging due to limited archaeological evidence. By studying a 25-foot submerged bridge, an interdisciplinary research team -- led by USF geology Professor Bogdan Onac -- was able to provide compelling evidence of earlier human activity inside Genovesa Cave, located in the Spanish island of Mallorca. "The presence of this submerged bridge and other artifacts indicates a sophisticated level of activity, implying that early settlers recognized the cave's water resources and strategically built infrastructure to navigate it," Onac said. The cave, located near Mallorca's coast, has passages now flooded due to rising sea levels, with distinct calcite encrustations forming during periods of high sea level. These formations, along with a light-colored band on the submerged bridge, serve as proxies for precisely tracking historical sea-level changes and dating the bridge's construction. Mallorca, despite being the sixth largest island in the Mediterranean, was among the last to be colonized. Previous research suggested human presence as far back as 9,000 years, but inconsistencies and poor preservation of the radiocarbon dated material, such as nearby bones and pottery, led to doubts about these findings. Newer studies have used charcoal, ash and bones found on the island to create a timeline of human settlement about 4,400 years ago. This aligns the timeline of human presence with significant environmental events, such as the extinction of the goat-antelope genus Myotragus balearicus . By analyzing overgrowths of minerals on the bridge and the elevation of a coloration band on the bridge, Onac and the team discovered the bridge was constructed nearly 6,000 years ago, more than two-thousand years older than the previous estimation -- narrowing the timeline gap between eastern and western Mediterranean settlements. "This research underscores the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration in uncovering historical truths and advancing our understanding of human history," Onac said. This study was supported by several National Science Foundation grants and involved extensive fieldwork, including underwater exploration and precise dating techniques. Onac will continue exploring cave systems, some of which have deposits that formed millions of years ago, so he can identify preindustrial sea levels and examine the impact of modern greenhouse warming on sea-level rise. This research was done in collaboration with Harvard University, the University of New Mexico and the University of Balearic Islands.

The specimen, which is around 125 million years old, was found in the cliffs of Compton Bay on the Isle of Wight in 2013 by fossil collector Nick Chase, before he tragically died of cancer. Jeremy Lockwood, a retired GP and University of Portsmouth PhD student, helped with the dinosaur's excavation and has spent years analysing the 149 different bones that make up the skeleton. Jeremy determined that the skeleton represented a new genus and species, which he named Comptonatus chasei in tribute to Nick. Jeremy said: "Nick had a phenomenal nose for finding dinosaur bones -- he really was a modern-day Mary Anning. He collected fossils daily in all weathers and donated them to museums. I was hoping we'd spend our dotage collecting together as we were of similar ages, but sadly that wasn't to be the case. "Despite his many wonderful discoveries over the years, including the most complete Iguanodon skull ever found in Britain, this is the first dinosaur to be named after him." When it was first discovered, the specimen was thought to be a known dinosaur called Mantellisaurus , but Jeremy's study revealed a lot more dinosaur diversity. Indeed, this is the second new genus to be described by Jeremy. He said: "I've been able to show this dinosaur is different because of certain unique features in its skull, teeth and other parts of its body. For example its lower jaw has a straight bottom edge, whereas most iguanodontians have a jaw that curves downwards. It also has a very large pubic hip bone, which is much bigger than other similar dinosaurs. It's like a dinner plate!" Jeremy doesn't know why the pubic hip bone, which is placed at the base of the abdomen was so big: "It was probably for muscle attachments, which might mean its mode of locomotion was a bit different, or it could have been to support the stomach contents more effectively, or even have been involved in how the animal breathed, but all of these theories are somewhat speculative." Jeremy named the dinosaur Comptonatus after Compton Bay where it was found and 'tonatus' is a latin word meaning 'thunderous'. "This animal would have been around a ton, about as big as a large male American bison. And evidence from fossil footprints found nearby shows it was likely to be a herding animal, so possibly large herds of these heavy dinosaurs may have been thundering around if spooked by predators on the floodplains over 120 million years ago." Dr Susannah Maidment, Senior Researcher and palaeontologist at the Natural History Museum and senior author of the paper completed whilst supervising Jeremy's PhD, commented: " Comptonatus is a fantastic dinosaur specimen: one of the most complete to be found in the UK in a century. "Its recognition as a new species is due to incredibly detailed work by NHM Scientific Associate Dr Jeremy Lockwood, whose research continues to reveal that the diversity of dinosaurs in southern England in the Early Cretaceous was much greater than previously realised. "The specimen, which is younger than Brighstoneus but older than Mantellisaurus (two iguandontian dinosaurs closely related to Comptonatus ) demonstrate fast rates of evolution in iguandontian dinosaurs during this time period, and could help us understand how ecosystems recovered after a putative extinction event at the end of the Jurassic Period." Despite only four new dinosaur species being described on the Isle of Wight in the whole of the 1900s, there have been eight new species named in the last five years. Jeremy added: "This really is a remarkable find. It helps us understand more about the different types of dinosaurs that lived in England in the Early Cretaceous. This adds to recent research that shows that Wessex was one of the world's most diverse ecosystems." The dinosaur has been added to the collections at the Dinosaur Isle Museum in Sandown on the Isle of Wight. The paper is published today in the Journal of Systematic Palaeontology. Dr Martin Munt, Dinosaur Isle curator, said: "Ongoing research on the museum collection continues to reveal exciting new discoveries. Most of Nick's most important finds have remained on the Island, a lasting legacy. "We can look forward to many more new types of prehistoric creatures being discovered from the Island's cliffs and collection." Mike Greenslade, General Manager for the National Trust on the Isle of Wight, said: "This extraordinary discovery at National Trust's Compton Bay highlights the rich natural heritage of the Isle of Wight. "Finding the most complete dinosaur in the UK in a century not only showcases the island's palaeontological significance but also underscores the importance of preserving our landscapes for future generations to explore and learn from. "Nick Chase's remarkable find and Jeremy Lockwood's dedicated research are a testament to the incredible history waiting to be uncovered here. We are thrilled to be part of this ongoing journey of discovery and scientific advancement."

"I opened this jar of bones labeled 'lizard' at the Natural History Museum of Utah, and was like, oh wow, there's a fragmentary skeleton here," said lead author Hank Woolley from the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County's Dinosaur Institute. "We know very little about large-bodied lizards from the Kaiparowits Formation in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument in Utah, so I knew this was significant right away." Published on June 17, 2025 in the journal Royal Society Open Science , the collaborative research led by the Dinosaur Institute and the Natural History Museum of Utah (NHMU) reveals hidden treasures awaiting future paleontologists in the bowels of museum fossil collections, and the vast potential of paleontological heritage preserved in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument and other public lands. "Discovering a new species of lizard that is an ancestor of modern Gila monsters is pretty cool in and of itself, but what's particularly exciting is what it tells us about the unique 76-million-year-old ecosystem it lived in," said co-author Randy Irmis, associate professor at the University of Utah and curator of paleontology at NHMU. "The fact that Bolg co-existed with several other large lizard species indicates that this was a stable and productive ecosystem where these animals were taking advantage of a wide variety of prey and different micro-habitats." A Middle Earth-inspired moniker Bolg represents an evolutionary lineage that sprouted within a group of large-bodied lizards called monstersaurs, that still roam the deserts from which Bolg was recovered. Woolley knew that a new species of monstersaur called for an appropriate name from an iconic monster creator, Tolkien. " Bolg is a great sounding name. It's a goblin prince from 'The Hobbit,' and I think of these lizards as goblin-like, especially looking at their skulls," said Woolley. He used the fictional Tolkien Elvish language Sindarin to craft the species epithet. "Amon" means "mound," and "dol" means "head," a reference to the mound-like osteoderms found on Bolg's and other monstersaur's skulls. "Mound-headed Bolg" would fit right in with the goblins -- and it's revealing quite a bit about monstersaurs. Hidden gems in collection drawers The Bolg amondol discovery highlights the likelihood that more large-bodied lizards existed during the Late Cretaceous Period than previously thought. Bolg , along with other fossils from the Kaiparowits Formation, demonstrate at least three types of predatory lizards lived in the Late Cretaceous sub-tropical floodplains of what is now Southern Utah. Additionally, this find shows that unexplored diversity is waiting to be dug up both in the field and in paleontology collections. " Bolg is a great example of the importance of natural history museum collections," Irmis said. "Although we knew the specimen was significant when it was discovered back in 2005, it took a specialist in lizard evolution like Hank to truly recognize its scientific importance and take on the task of researching and scientifically describing this new species." The researchers identified the new species from tiny pieces of skull, limbs, girdles, vertebrae and bony armor called osteoderms. Most fossil lizards from the age of dinosaurs are even scrappier -- often just single, isolated bones or teeth -- so despite their fragmentary nature, the parts of Bolg 's skeleton that survived contain a stunning amount of information. "That means more characteristics are available for us to assess and compare to similar-looking lizards. Importantly, we can use those characteristics to understand this animal's evolutionary relationships and test hypotheses about where it fits on the lizard tree of life," Woolley said. Stairway to monstersaurs The monstersauria are characterized by their large size and distinctive features, such as sharp, spire-like teeth and pitted, polygonal armor attached to their skulls. They have a roughly 100-million-year history, but their fossil record is largely incomplete, making the discoverya big deal for understanding these charismatic lizards. Bolg would have been a bit of a monster to our eyes. "Three feet tip to tail, maybe even bigger than that, depending on the length of the tail and torso," said Woolley. "So, by modern lizard standards they're a very large animal, similar in size to a Savannah monitor lizard; something that you wouldn't want to mess around with." Bolg's closest known relative hails from the other side of the planet in the Gobi Desert of Asia. Though dinosaurs have long been known to have traveled between the once-connected continents of the Late Cretaceous Period, Bolg reveals that smaller animals also made the trek, suggesting there were common patterns of biogeography across terrestrial vertebrates during this time. The rocks where Bolg was discovered -- the Kaiparowits Formation of Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument -- have emerged as a paleontological hotspot over the past 25 years, producing one of the most astounding dinosaur-dominated records in North America. Discoveries like this underscore the importance of preserving public lands in the Western U.S. for science and research. "The exceptional record of big lizards from Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument may prove to be a normal part of dinosaur-dominated ecosystems from North America, filling key roles as smaller predators hunting down eggs and small animals in the forests of Laramidia," said co-author Joe Sertich from the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute and Colorado State University. This story is edited from the original by Tyler Hayden, science communication specialist, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County. Other authors include Keegan Melstrom, University of Central Oklahoma and Nathan Smith, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, Dinosaur Institute. Field collection of the specimens described in this study was conducted under paleontological permits issued by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). This study was funded by the BLM, National Science Foundation award 2205564, the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles Dinosaur Institute and the University of Utah.

"This research reveals a critical threat to the living culture and livelihood of Rapa Nui," said Noah Paoa, lead author of the study and doctoral student in the Department of Earth Sciences in the UH Mānoa School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST). "For the community, these sites are an essential part of reaffirming identity and support the revitalization of traditions. Economically, they are the backbone of the island's tourism industry. Failure to address this threat could ultimately endanger the island's UNESCO world heritage site status." "As we work to understand the impacts of future sea level rise, we provide information that not only enables us to maintain safe, functional spaces and infrastructure, but also to support thriving communities," said Chip Fletcher, co-author of the study and dean of SOEST. "That means we must document threats to culturally significant places and assets, and develop plans to preserve and protect what matters to communities." Computer simulations reveal vulnerabilities Paoa and his team built a detailed digital twin of the study site and used advanced computer models to simulate the wave environment along the coastline. They then mapped the projected flooding caused by waves under future sea level rise scenarios. The flood extent was then overlaid on geospatial layers containing the location of cultural assets provided to the team by local partners, which allowed the researchers to identify the cultural assets that will be flooded. "Unfortunately, from a scientific standpoint, the findings are not surprising," said Paoa. "We know that sea level rise poses a direct threat to coastlines globally. The critical question was not if the site would be impacted, but how soon and how severely. Our work aimed to set potential timelines by which we could expect the impacts to happen. Finding that waves could reach Ahu Tongariki by 2080 provides the specific, urgent data needed to incentivize community discussion and planning for the future." The challenges facing Rapa Nui mirror those in other coastal areas of the world, including Hawaiʻi. "While Hawaiʻi is invested in protecting coastal infrastructure from sea level rise, the irreplaceable coastal cultural heritage sites in Hawai'i and across the Pacific face the same urgent threat," Paoa added. "Our research in Rapa Nui serves as a vital blueprint, demonstrating how we can use science to forecast risks to sacred places, such as coastal heiau and ancestral burial sites. By developing and applying these methods we hope we can help protect what is precious to the people of Hawaiʻi -- provided such work is guided by, and deemed appropriate by, the Native Hawaiian community." Paoa is now using available data on coastal flooding to examine potential sea level rise impacts on cultural assets in Hawai'i. In the future, he and the research team, in collaboration with local partners in Rapa Nui, plan to further investigate potential impacts of sea level rise on the island's coastal cultural assets and examine adaptation and mitigation efforts to safeguard the cultural heritage.

All sandy beaches For her research, Lansu analyzed a huge database, previously created by colleagues at TU Delft and Deltares, of all the world's (ice-free) sandy beaches. On top of that map, she projected another map of all human-built structures and paved roads. With that, she calculated the distance from the high waterline to the first built-up area. The average 390 meters around the world that resulted from these measurements is shockingly little, Lansu argues. "For a seaside resort like Zandvoort or Scheveningen, it may still sound like a long distance, but when you consider that it's an average that includes the beaches of Walvis Bay in Namibia or the Amazon in South America, we are building remarkably close to the coast." Vulnerable to sea level rise Constructions close to the sea make coastal areas extra vulnerable, Lansu emphasizes in her dissertation. "The narrower a coast, the sooner you will run into problems with rising sea levels." In addition to those weaker defenses, narrower coasts are also bad news for biodiversity, Lansu found in a comparative study in both the Netherlands and the United States. In the Netherlands, together with colleagues, Lansu visited 35 dune areas. In each of these areas, they walked a transect perpendicular to the coastline and determined plant diversity every hundred meters. She did the same along 12 transects in the states of Florida and Georgia. Lansu: "It was clear that the wider the coast was, the greater the plant diversity. Especially the first two kilometers, that diversity increased rapidly." In the Netherlands, only coastal areas of at least 3.8 kilometers wide reached their maximum plant diversity. "But unfortunately, such wide zones are rare. Dutch dune areas are on average no more than one kilometer wide, leaving plant diversity stuck at half the possible level," Lansu said. Manage better or plan smarter The limited biodiversity in narrow coastal strips can be boosted to some extent by nature management. But much more important, Lansu argues, is spatial planning. "We will have to take into account rising sea levels and avoid further hardening our coasts. We also need to start looking at coastal expansion, as has been done in the Netherlands with the 'Sand Motor' near the village of Monster." The Sand Motor is a place where a gigantic amount of sand was deposited off the coast once in 2011, only to have it spread naturally along the coast. Lansu: "At that spot you can already see quite a few embryonic dunes forming on the newly raised beach. But future coastal expansion could stimulate natural sand dynamics and associated biodiversity even better. After all, biodiversity is not a luxury. It is our insurance for the future, for coastal defense, drinking water supply and in general also for our food supply."

The research -- which involved experts representing 11 countries as part of the UKRI-funded RECLAIM Network Plus -- found that urban greening has a range of benefits, including cooler streets, cleaner air and water, improved mental health and greater biodiversity. Global case studies highlighted in the paper demonstrate how different cities are making nature-based solutions work in practice. Singapore's 'City in Nature' has seen major success with its green corridors and vertical gardens that help reduce heat and support biodiversity. In Cardiff, more than 80,000 trees have been planted as part of the city's One Planet Strategy, while Copenhagen has integrated green roofs and climate-resilient neighbourhoods to manage flood risk and improve liveability. The research, published in Frontiers' Sustainable Cities , also stresses the importance of meaningful community involvement and equitable access to green spaces to avoid 'green gentrification' -- where improvements risk pricing out the very communities they aim to support. Professor Prashant Kumar, Founding Director of GCARE and lead author of the paper, said: "Urban greening can be a cost-effective and practical solution to some of our most pressing challenges -- from climate change and biodiversity loss to growing health inequalities. Cities like Singapore have shown what's possible, but our research highlights critical barriers here in the UK that requires collaboration and inclusive design to make this a reality. "Nature-based infrastructure is not just a 'nice-to-have' aesthetic enhancement but a fundamental component of sustainable urban development. I'm proud to lead the RECLAIM Network Plus, a vibrant community of researchers, businesses, charities, environmental groups, and policymakers driving impactful research and leadership in urban greening." To help cities deliver urban greening at scale, experts are calling for integrated action that embeds nature into every stage of planning and policy. This includes incentivising developers to prioritise nature-based infrastructure and securing long-term funding. With contributed insights across academia, government and industry, RECLAIM Network Plus sets in place new resources and guidance -- from minimum green space targets to stronger funding and coordination across health, housing and climate policy. Ben McCallan, Greener Futures Engagement Lead at Surrey County Council and co-author of the study, said: "Unfortunately, Surrey has the most polluted stretch of highway in the country, which is why we've included urban greening as a priority in our Local Nature Recovery Strategy. The RECLAIM Conference is always a fascinating look into how other areas are approaching green infrastructure -- and highlights the many benefits it can bring to people and nature. It also shines a light on how far we need to go in order to match the efforts of other countries tackling climate change and nature loss." Tools like AI, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and remote sensing are increasingly enabling cities to map environmental risks, inform smarter design and monitor the long-term impact of green infrastructure. Combined with data-driven decision making, these technological advancements can help accelerate progress towards multiple Sustainable Development Goals and support the large-scale delivery of urban greening. Professor Veronica Soebarto, Lead Initiative in Green Urban Futures at the University of Adelaide's Environment Institute and co-author of the paper, said: "Considering the many benefits of greening, there is no acceptable justification to not incorporate it within city planning, designs and developments. With warming climates occurring around the world, urban greening is essential in providing reliefs from extreme heat by cooling the outdoor environment and reducing heat that enters buildings. At the same time, it is a solution that brings nature to cities, positively impacting health and wellbeing, and improving liveability." The paper was developed through the RECLAIM Network Plus (Reclaiming Forgotten Cities -- Turning Cities from Vulnerable Spaces to Healthy Places for People), funded by UK Research and Innovation (UKRI). It is led by the University of Surrey's GCARE in collaboration with the UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology (UKCEH) and the Universities of Bath, Bangor and Warwick.

During glacier surges the ice begins moving at speed and the front can advance, in some settings blocking rivers and forming lakes that put communities and infrastructure downstream at risk of flooding. The study, published in the Journal of Glaciology , monitored a lake dammed by a surge of the Shisper Glacier, located in the Karakoram mountain range, which extends across the borders of Pakistan, China, and India. Life cycle of the Shisper Glacier lake The glacier began surging in early 2018, blocking a river and forming an ice-dammed lake. Researchers from the University of Portsmouth and International Centre of Integrated Mountain Development analysed this phenomenon using satellite images captured by the European Space Agency. They identified that the lake underwent six phases of filling and drainage, continuing even after the glacier stopped surging in 2020. Four of the phases led to the formation of a large lake that grew to its maximum size by May each year, threatening the safety of the communities below. It took on average at least 155 days for the lake to fill. The largest lake phase reached a volume of 33.7 million cubic metres in May 2022 -- more than 13,000 Olympic sized swimming pools. Each large lake phase drained rapidly between May and July as glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs), typically over one to two days. The GLOF in May 2022 caused the Hassanabad Bridge, a major crossing point on the Karakoram Highway between Pakistan and China, to collapse, and also caused extensive damage to nearby homes, buildings, and hydropower infrastructure. Protecting nearby communities Pakistan is home to the largest number of glaciers outside the polar regions. The new study highlights the importance of closely monitoring glacier surges and any lakes that subsequently form, in an effort to reduce potential future damage. Lead author, Dr. Harold Lovell, Senior Lecturer and glaciologist from the University of Portsmouth, said: "It's hard to predict when glaciers will surge and whether they will dam dangerous lakes, but we know that in some settings this is more likely. Satellite data allows us to identify and track surges, potentially helping to pinpoint locations where lakes may be dammed in the future. This information is crucial for helping to warn communities about periods of increased flood risk." The findings also revealed that hazards caused by glacier surges -- like the formation of large lakes -- can continue for many years after the surge has ended. Co-lead author, Dr. Sher Muhammad from the International Centre of Integrated Mountain Development, said: "Even after the Shisper Glacier stopped surging and advancing, the lake continued to form and drain for two more years, causing damaging floods with estimated losses of over $4 million to private property. "However, our data suggests that the phases of lake formation resulting from the Shisper Glacier's latest surge have ended, which may offer a period of respite, particularly to residents of Hassanabad village who live in its path." The risks of glacier-related hazards in the region could be reduced through the implementation of community-based early warning systems, the installation of gabion walls for flood protection, and the building of community and infrastructure resilience.

This phenomenon, called the "safe development paradox," is described in a new paper from North Carolina State University. Lead author Georgina Sanchez, a research scholar in NC State's Center for Geospatial Analytics, said this may be an unintended byproduct of how the Federal Emergency Management Agency classifies areas based on their probability of dangerous flooding. Known as flood mapping, this classification system describes areas in terms of their likelihood of being flooded each year. These classifications are then used to determine all kinds of regulatory requirements, such as whether a developer or homeowner must purchase flood insurance. For example, an area with a 1% chance of flooding in any given year would be referred to as a 100-year floodplain -- and anything in the 100-year floodplain is designated "high risk." However, by designating the 100-year floodplain as "high risk," regulators may unintentionally give the mistaken assumption that anything outside that zone carries no risk, Sanchez said. "What our current methods do is draw a line between the 100-year floodplain, which is considered 'high risk,' and everything outside of it. We communicate flood risk in a way that says you are either on the 'at risk' side of that line, or the 'minimal risk' side," Sanchez said. "If you are on the 'safe' side, then you are not required to purchase flood insurance or meet strict structural requirements. It then becomes more affordable to live just outside the floodplain, where the perceived risk is lower, yet you are still close to the beautiful lakes, rivers and coastlines we love." This, Sanchez said, creates a mechanism that clusters development just beyond the highest-risk flood areas, even though in reality the risk extends beyond the floodplain's edge. Previous research on the safe development paradox has focused on the "levee effect," in which the creation of flood-prevention structures gives the false impression that an area is safe from flooding and thus attracts increased development. This in turn leads to concentrated losses if a flood event exceeds what the flood-prevention structure was designed to withstand. In focusing on regulatory floodplain mapping instead of these structures, Sanchez and her collaborators uncovered another example of the paradox, where efforts to reduce flood risk paradoxically intensify it by promoting development immediately outside of designated "high-risk" zones. By overlaying floodplain maps from over 2,300 counties with data on prior development trends and simulated future development, researchers found evidence for the safe development paradox from the national level down to the county level. The study found that as much as 24% of all development nationwide occurs within 250 meters of a 100-year floodplain, and projections indicate that this number will continue to grow through at least the year 2060 without new policies to prevent flood exposure. While the study concluded in 2019, these findings are apparent in the recent destruction caused by Hurricane Helene in western North Carolina, Sanchez said. "Because of the steep topography in places like western North Carolina, there is an even greater concentration of development compared to flatter areas," she said. "Developers tend to seek land that is flat enough to build on, which often happens to be along stream networks and closer to flood-prone areas. "When I saw the news after Helene and looked at the images from the region, I could painfully see the findings of our study reflected in those scenes."

The team of researchers led by USF St. Petersburg GIS and Remote Sensing Professor Barnali Dixon used the CRIS-HAZARD app to analyze real-time flooding in Pinellas County, which is home to 588 miles of coastline. The app also received data from users in neighboring Hillsborough County during Hurricane Milton, which allowed the team to expand its research. The app, developed in collaboration with researchers at Georgia Tech, combines volunteered geographic information and community crowdsourced data such as photos and videos with near real-time data on flooding. Using dynamic modeling and mapping tools, including artificial intelligence (AI), the app can identify and extract estimated water elevation from imagery submitted that will be used to inform emergency managers and policymakers. The CRIS-HAZARD app made a soft launch on Sept. 18. Eight days later, Hurricane Helene hit Florida's west coast north of Tampa Bay as a Category 4 hurricane. On Oct. 9, Hurricane Milton hit Florida's west coast south of Tampa Bay as a Category 3 hurricane. Images gathered from the back-to-back storms gave the team important information about how much flooding occurred and where in the Tampa Bay area. "People used it to report what was happening in their backyard," said Dixon, who is also executive director of USF's Initiative on Coastal Adaptation and Resilience (iCAR). "This information is their lived experience, and we want to take that experience and make data out of it using AI tools that will process images and figure out the depth of the water. We can use that data to calibrate and validate models." In addition to the data provided for researchers, the pictures and videos are accessible to other users so they can see where flooding is happening, which helps inform them of hazards in the community. Dixon compares it to the real-time traffic app Waze, where drivers can see traffic back-ups and where police activity is happening along roads and highways. "We make it a real-time display for about seven days, then the data is archived," Dixon said. "For example, if there is a big rain event today, you want to know what is happening today, not a month or two months back. But the data stays there so we can access and analyze it." In 2023, Dixon received a $1.5 million National Science Foundation grant to build the app. Since then, her team has made significant progress. They have installed 14 cameras in St. Petersburg, with 30 more planned throughout Pinellas County. The cameras are placed in front of five-foot poles with reflective tape that show flooding as it's happening. Each strip is placed six inches apart. Images captured by the cameras during Hurricane Helene indicate that about 3.5 feet of water rose above the seawall in many locations. The new app, which provides an interactive user experience, is based on the existing Community Resiliency Information System (CRIS), a website created in 2020 by iCAR. The CRIS platform leverages crowdsourced data to identify climate-related vulnerabilities in local communities. Residents can input information related to issues such as flooding and power outages. This information can then be used by policymakers and neighborhood leaders to make decisions about policy and resource allocation. The data also allows emergency managers to identify areas with concentrations of people who need transportation assistance or are reliant on power for medical needs. Dixon has been working with community leaders in St. Petersburg's Childs and Bartlett Park neighborhoods for several years, where residents have successfully used the system to prepare for extreme storm events. Through the CRIS website, participants can view maps and see their risk of storm surge and sea level rise. They can also share their own information and suggest ways to improve the system. "We have used the application at all our community town halls," said Erica Hall, executive director of the Florida Food Policy Council. "As a community leader and liaison, this will help communities tremendously to understand the connection between sea level rise, climate change, extreme heat and coastal flooding. Some vulnerable coastal neighborhoods also show food insecurity and health disparity concerns. Having CRIS map those concerns tells a story that will allow the community to understand." As principal investigator, Dixon developed the app alongside co-principal investigators Yi Qiang from the USF School of Geosciences and two others from Georgia Tech, Subhrajit Guhathakurta from the College of Design and Peng Chen from the College of Computing. The research team will continue to work with community partners in St. Petersburg and other flood-prone coastal areas of Pinellas County to refine the app. As the CRIS-HAZARD app gains users and data, the team hopes to make it available to communities nationwide.

Slow-moving landslides can move as little as one millimeter per year and up to three meters per year. Slopes with slow-moving landslides may seem safe to settle on; the slide itself may be inconspicuous or undetected altogether. As the slide creeps along, houses and other infrastructure can be damaged. The slow slide can accelerate abruptly, likely in response to changes in precipitation. Sudden acceleration can worsen damage and, in rare cases, lead to fatalities. Those same slopes may be repopulated years later due to pressure from urban growth, especially when floods drive people from lower-elevation areas. Nearly 1.3 billion people live in mountainous regions, according to the IPCC, and that number is growing. "As people migrate uphill and establish settlements on unstable slopes, a rapidly rising population is facing an unknown degree of exposure to slow landslides -- having the ground move underneath their houses," said Joaquin Vicente Ferrer, a natural hazards researcher at the University of Potsdam and lead author of the study. The study presents the first global assessment of exposure to slow-moving landslides, which are left out of most assessments of populations exposed to landslide risk. It was published in Earth's Future , which publishes interdisciplinary research on the past, present and future of our planet and its inhabitants. Finding slow-moving landslides Through landslide mapping and inventory efforts, the authors compiled a new database of 7,764 large slow-moving landslides with areas of at least 0.1 square kilometers (about 25 acres) located in regions classified as "mountain risk" by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Using this database, they explored regional and global drivers of exposure using statistical models. Of the landslides documented, 563 -- about 7% -- are inhabited by hundreds of thousands of people. The densest settlements on slow-moving landslides were in northwestern South America and southeastern Africa. Central Asia, northeast Africa, and the Tibetan Plateau had the largest settlements exposed to slow-moving landslides. West-central Asia, and the Alai Range of Kyrgyzstan in particular, also had a high number of inhabited slow-moving landslides. The study only looked at permanent settlements, so nomadic and refugee settlements were not included. In all regions in the study, urban center expansion was associated with an increase in exposure to slow-moving landslides. As a city's footprint expands, new growth may be forced to occur in unsafe areas, including slopes with known slow-moving landslides. But poorer populations may have few other options, the authors point out. Flooding and future climates Ties between climatic drivers and slow-moving landslide activation remain uncertain, but in general, scientists think intense precipitation and swings from dry to wet conditions can trigger an acceleration in slow-moving landslides. Those factors can also increase flooding, which in turn may drive people to move to higher ground. The study found that populations facing increased flooding tended to have more settlements on slow-moving landslides. The strength of that relationship varied regionally; western North America and southeast Africa had the strongest associations. The study also highlighted a lack of information in poor regions with known landslide risks, such as in the Hindu-Kush Himalayas, and called for more landslide detection and mapping to improve understanding of risks in those areas. "We highlight a need to ramp-up mapping and monitoring efforts for slow-moving landslides in the East African Rift, Hindu-Kush-Himalayas, and South American Andes to better understand what drives exposure," Ferrer said. "Despite a limited number of landslide inventories from Africa and South America, we found communities in cities are densely inhabiting slow-moving landslides there." Even in areas with good landslide mapping, such as northern North America (i.e., Canada and Alaska) and New Zealand, settlements are located on slow-moving landslides. While these weren't included in the study, they remain important to consider, the authors said. "Our study offers findings from a new global database of large slow-moving landslides to provide the first global estimation of slow-moving landslide exposure," Ferrer said. "With our methods, we quantify the underlying uncertainties amid disparate levels of monitoring and accessible landslide knowledge."

These findings from scientists at the University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science provide new information on patterns of floodplain development that pose a potential risk to people and communities in regions like the Southeastern U.S. that are especially prone to flooding. In the new study, researchers combined geospatial land use, impervious surface, and housing data with information from digitized regulatory floodplain maps to measure new floodplain development for communities across the U.S. The analysis, published in the journal Earth's Future , found that over 840,000 new residential properties were built in the floodplain across the U.S. with about 398,000 of those built in Florida, which represents 21 percent of all new housing built in the state and the highest total of any U.S. state. "Given the size of floodplains and amount of new overall housing growth, those figures are actually much less than we would expect," said the study's lead author Armen Agopian, a Ph.D. student in the Abess graduate program at the Rosenstiel School. The researchers note that if new housing was distributed proportionally to the share of floodplain land in Florida, they would expect to see 40% of new housing built in the floodplain. They also found that 74 percent of communities across the United States have limited new development in floodplains, and 87 percent have limited new housing in floodplains through local government regulations and practices. The analysis also found that coastal communities are more likely to concentrate new development and housing in floodplains as compared to inland communities. The study revealed that communities that participate in FEMA's Community Rating System, a voluntary incentive program that rewards communities that adopt certain practices with discounted flood insurance rates, were found to have a higher likelihood of floodplain development. "Communities with a flood problem enroll in the program, but participating alone isn't enough to support safer development patterns. Instead, communities need both to participate and to improve their floodplain management practices -- those are the ones that start to limit floodplain development," said Agopian. Development in flood-prone areas is a major driver of increases in flood-related damage, increasing both the likelihood that a flood will impact people and infrastructure and the severity of harm when it does. This study is the first comprehensive dataset measuring floodplain development outcomes, community by community, nationwide. To date, most research on flood damage and actions has focused on the places that have experienced big floods with homes destroyed or lives lost. "What we find is that many communities around the nation have taken smart action early on, avoiding development in their floodplains from the start. There's a lot we can learn from these communities that are often with little fanfare avoiding flood problems from the start," said senior author of the study Katharine Mach, professor and chair of the Rosenstiel School Department of Environmental Science and Policy. The study was supported by National Science Foundation grants (# 2034308, # 2034239 and # 2033929), the Leonard and Jayne Abess Center for Ecosystem Science and Policy, and the Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Science.

The problem lies in traditional planning's failure to recognize flood connectivity: how surface runoff from driveways, lawns and streets -- and the flows in river channels and pipes -- are all interlinked. The result is interactions, often unanticipated, between different stormwater systems that can make flooding worse. "When we design, we typically focus on localized solutions," said Valeriy Ivanov, U-M professor of civil and environmental engineering and co-first author of the study published in Nature Cities. "We have an area of concern, sometimes it's a single plot of land, or a set of parcels that need to be connected by stormwater infrastructure, and we design specifically for those areas. "But those areas are impacted by flooding that occurs around them, and that means designed stormwater infrastructure may have unintended consequences." The study is based on record-breaking rainfall that hit Metro Detroit on Aug. 11, 2014, resulting in flooding across the region. The disaster closed highways, stranded drivers, and caused power outages and property damage to over 100,000 homes, with a cost of $1.8 billion. Researchers analyzed data from that event, particularly from the city of Warren, and placed their findings in the context of current U.S. stormwater design standards and flood warning practices to develop policy recommendations. Those include: "Current flood mapping practices are indicative of outdated thinking that needs to change," said Vinh Tran, U-M assistant research scientist in civil and environmental engineering and co-first author. "Whether it's the Federal Emergency Management Agency or someone else producing it, they only provide estimates for floodplains that are near rivers. But here's the problem: In cities, flooding can happen far from any river or stream. "Take Warren, Michigan, for example. The official flood maps didn't show flood risks in parts of the city that were miles from any major waterway. And it's not just Warren -- this is typical all over the country." According to FEMA, flooding is "the most common and costly disaster in the U.S." That risk is increasing due to climate change. Financially, it's a problem. FEMA notes that between 1980 and 2000, FEMA's National Flood Insurance Program paid out $9.4 billion in insurance claims. Over the following 20-year period, the program paid out $62.2 billion -- an increase of over 660%. "Without updated designs, the economic impact of flooding will only grow, placing a heavier burden on governments and taxpayers," said Jeff Bednar, environmental resources manager for Macomb County and a research contributor on the project. "By investing in resilient infrastructure now, we not only protect our environment but also strengthen the foundation for economic growth."

An international research team -- including scientists from the University of East Anglia (UEA) -- deployed an unmanned submersible beneath the Dotson Ice Shelf in West Antarctica. The underwater vehicle, 'Ran' , was programmed to dive into the cavity of the 350metre-thick ice shelf and scan the ice above it with an advanced sonar. Over 27 days, the submarine travelled more than 1000 kilometres back and forth under the shelf, reaching 17 kilometres into the cavity. An ice shelf is a mass of glacial ice, fed from land by tributary glaciers, that floats in the sea above an ice shelf cavity. Dotson Ice Shelf is part of the West Antarctic ice sheet -- and next to Thwaites Glacier -- which is considered to have a potentially large impact on future sea level rise due to its size and location. The researchers report their findings of this unique survey in a new paper published today in the journal Science Advances . They found some things as expected, for example the glacier melts faster where strong underwater currents erode its base. Using the submersible, they were able to measure the currents below the glacier for the first time and prove why the western part of Dotson Ice Shelf melts so fast. They also found evidence of very high melt at vertical fractures that extend through the glacier. However, the team also saw new patterns on the glacier base that raise questions. The mapping showed that the base is not smooth, but there is a peak and valley ice-scape with plateaus and formations resembling sand dunes. The researchers hypothesize that these may have been formed by flowing water under the influence of Earth's rotation. Lead author Anna Wåhlin, Professor of Oceanography at the University of Gothenburg in Sweden, said: "We have previously used satellite data and ice cores to observe how ice shelves change over time. By navigating the submersible into the cavity, we were able to get high resolution maps of the ice underside. It's a bit like seeing the back of the moon for the first time." The expedition was carried out in regions of drifting ice in West Antarctica in 2022 during a research cruise for the TARSAN project, a joint US-UK funded initiative that is part of the International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration. The project is studying how atmospheric and oceanic processes are influencing the behaviour of the Thwaites and Dotson Ice Shelves -- neighbouring ice shelves which are behaving differently. Co-author Dr Rob Hall, from UEA's School of Environmental Sciences, co-led the cruise on the RV Nathaniel B Palmer, on which the observations were made in January to March 2022. He said: "Anna and her team successfully piloted their autonomous underwater vehicle 'Ran' over 1000 km under Dotson Ice Shelf collecting a huge range of data and samples, which will take several years to process and analyse. "The incredible high-resolution images of the underside of the ice shelf are the icing on the cake and will open up a whole new avenue of scientific research." Prof Karen Heywood, also from UEA and a co-author, is UK lead scientist on the TARSAN project. She said: "This has been such an exciting project to work on. When Anna sent round the first images of the underside of the Dotson ice shelf we were thrilled -- nobody had ever seen this before. But we were also baffled -- there were cracks and swirls in the ice that we weren't expecting. It looked more like art! "We wondered what could be causing these. All of the glaciologists and the oceanographers in the TARSAN project got together to brainstorm ideas. It's been like detective work -- using fundamental ocean physics to test theories against the shape and size of the patterns under the ice. We've been able to show for the first time some of the processes that melt the underside of ice shelves. Prof Heywood added: "These ice shelves are already floating on the sea, so their melting doesn't directly affect sea level. However ultimately the melting of ice shelves causes the glaciers on land further upstream to flow faster and destabilise, which does lead to sea level rise, so these new observations will help the community of ice modellers to reduce the large uncertainties in future sea level." Scientists now realise there is a wealth of processes left to discover in future research missions under the glaciers. "The mapping has given us new data that we need to look at more closely. It is clear that many previous assumptions about melting of glacier undersides are falling short. Current models cannot explain the complex patterns we see. But with this method, we have a better chance of finding the answers," said Prof Wåhlin. "Better models are needed to predict how fast the ice shelves will melt in the future. It is exciting when oceanographers and glaciologists work together, combining remote sensing with oceanographic field data. This is needed to understand the glaciological changes taking place -- the driving force is in the ocean." In January 2024, the group returned with Ran to Dotson Ice Shelf to repeat the surveys, hoping to document changes. However, they were only able to complete one dive before Ran disappeared under the ice. "Although we got valuable data back, we did not get all we had hoped for," said Prof Wåhlin. "These scientific advances were made possible thanks to the unique submersible that Ran was. This research is needed to understand the future of Antarctica's ice sheet, and we hope to be able to replace Ran and continue this important work."

The research, led by scientists at Newcastle University, UK, found that glacier loss on Juneau Icefield, which straddles the boundary between Alaska and British Columbia, Canada, has increased dramatically since 2010. The team, which also included universities in the UK, USA and Europe, looked at records going back to 1770 and identified three distinct periods in how icefield volume changed. They saw that glacier volume loss remained fairly consistent from 1770 -- 1979 at between 0.65- 1.01 km 3 per year, increasing to 3.08-3.72 km 3 per year between 1979-2010. Between 2010-2020 there was a sharp acceleration when the rate of ice loss doubled, reaching 5.91 km 3 per year. In particular, the research, published in Nature Communications, found that icefield-wide, rates of glacier area shrinkage were five times faster from 2015-2019 relative to 1948-1979. Overall, the total ice loss across the Juneau icefield between 1770-2020 (315.3 ± 237.5 km 3 ) equated to just under a quarter of the original ice volume. The increased rate of glacier thinning has also been accompanied by increased glacier fragmentation. The team mapped a dramatic increase in disconnections, where the lower parts of a glacier become separated from the upper parts. Additionally, 100% of glaciers mapped in 2019 have receded relative to their position in 1770, and 108 glaciers have disappeared completely. Study lead, Dr Bethan Davies, Senior Lecturer, Newcastle University, said: "It's incredibly worrying that our research found a rapid acceleration since the early 21st century in the rate of glacier loss across the Juneau icefield. "Alaskan icefields -- which are predominantly flat, plateau icefields -- are particularly vulnerable to accelerated melt as the climate warms since ice loss happens across the whole surface, meaning a much greater area is affected. "Additionally, flatter ice caps and icefields cannot retreat to higher elevations and find a new equilibrium. "As glacier thinning on the Juneau plateau continues and ice retreats to lower levels and warmer air, the feedback processes this sets in motion is likely to prevent future glacier regrowth, potentially pushing glaciers beyond a tipping point into irreversible recession." Alaska contains some of the world's largest plateau icefields and their melting is a major contributor to current sea level rise. The researchers think the processes they observed at Juneau are likely to affect other, similar icefields elsewhere across Alaska and Canada, as well as Greenland, Norway and other high-Arctic locations. They also say current published projections for the Juneau icefield that suggest ice volume loss will be linear until 2040, accelerating only after 2070, may need to be updated to reflect the processes detailed in this latest study. Dr Davies said: "This work has shown that different processes can accelerate melt, which means that currrent glacier projections may be too small and underestimate glacier melt in the future." The team used a combination of historical glacier inventory records, 20 th century archival aerial photographs, and satellite imagery as well as geomorphological mapping conducted during fieldwork in 2022 to piece together a comprehensive picture of changes over the past 250 years. Dr Robert McNabb, Lecturer in Remote Sensing, Ulster University, said: "What was really exciting about this research was piecing together thousands of archived aerial photographs to extract elevation, which gave us a really detailed insight into the long-term behaviour of the icefield. "Putting together this archive of photographs, collected 70 and 50 years ago, was a little like doing the world's hardest jigsaw puzzle but the quality of the imagery meant we were able to reconstruct the icefield elevation in the pre-satellite era for the first time. Longer term archives like this one are an incredibly valuable resource, as they give us a much better understanding of the thresholds for accelerating change, as we've seen on the Juneau Icefield."

The existence of Titan's large seas and smaller lakes was confirmed in 2007, with images taken by NASA's Cassini spacecraft. Since then, scientists have pored over those and other images for clues to the moon's mysterious liquid environment. Now, MIT geologists have studied Titan's shorelines and shown through simulations that the moon's large seas have likely been shaped by waves. Until now, scientists have found indirect and conflicting signs of wave activity, based on remote images of Titan's surface. The MIT team took a different approach to investigate the presence of waves on Titan, by first modeling the ways in which a lake can erode on Earth. They then applied their modeling to Titan's seas to determine what form of erosion could have produced the shorelines in Cassini's images. Waves, they found, were the most likely explanation. The researchers emphasize that their results are not definitive; to confirm that there are waves on Titan will require direct observations of wave activity on the moon's surface. "We can say, based on our results, that if the coastlines of Titan's seas have eroded, waves are the most likely culprit," says Taylor Perron, the Cecil and Ida Green Professor of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences at MIT. "If we could stand at the edge of one of Titan's seas, we might see waves of liquid methane and ethane lapping on the shore and crashing on the coasts during storms. And they would be capable of eroding the material that the coast is made of." Perron and his colleagues, including first author Rose Palermo, a former MIT-WHOI Joint Program graduate student and a research geologist at the U.S. Geological Survey, will publish their study in a forthcoming issue of Science Advances . Their co-authors include MIT research scientist Jason Soderblom, former MIT postdoc Sam Birch, now an assistant professor at Brown University, Andrew Ashton at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and Alexander Hayes of Cornell University. "Taking a different tack" The presence of waves on Titan has been a somewhat controversial topic ever since Cassini spotted bodies of liquid on the moon's surface. "Some people who tried to see evidence for waves didn't see any, and said, 'These seas are mirror-smooth,'" Palermo says. "Others said they did see some roughness on the liquid surface but weren't sure if waves caused it." Knowing whether Titan's seas host wave activity could give scientists information about the moon's climate, such as the strength of the winds that could whip up such waves. Wave information could also help scientists predict how the shape of Titan's seas might evolve over time. Rather than look for direct signs of wave-like features in images of Titan, Perron says the team had to "take a different tack, and see, just by looking at the shape of the shoreline, if we could tell what's been eroding the coasts." Titan's seas are thought to have formed as rising levels of liquid flooded a landscape crisscrossed by river valleys. The researchers zeroed in on three scenarios for what could have happened next: no coastal erosion; erosion driven by waves; and "uniform erosion," driven either by "dissolution," in which liquid passively dissolves a coast's material, or a mechanism in which the coast gradually sloughs off under its own weight. The researchers simulated how various shoreline shapes would evolve under each of the three scenarios. To simulate wave-driven erosion, they took into account a variable known as "fetch," which describes the physical distance from one point on a shoreline to the opposite side of a lake or sea. "Wave erosion is driven by the height and angle of the wave," Palermo explains. "We used fetch to approximate wave height because the bigger the fetch, the longer the distance over which wind can blow and waves can grow." To test how shoreline shapes would differ between the three scenarios, the researchers started with a simulated sea with flooded river valleys around its edges. For wave-driven erosion, they calculated the fetch distance from every single point along the shoreline to every other point, and converted these distances to wave heights. Then, they ran their simulation to see how waves would erode the starting shoreline over time. They compared this to how the same shoreline would evolve under erosion driven by uniform erosion. The team repeated this comparative modeling for hundreds of different starting shoreline shapes. They found that the end shapes were very different depending on the underlying mechanism. Most notably, uniform erosion produced inflated shorelines that widened evenly all around, even in the flooded river valleys, whereas wave erosion mainly smoothed the parts of the shorelines exposed to long fetch distances, leaving the flooded valleys narrow and rough. "We had the same starting shorelines, and we saw that you get a really different final shape under uniform erosion versus wave erosion," Perron says. "They all kind of look like the flying spaghetti monster because of the flooded river valleys, but the two types of erosion produce very different endpoints." The team checked their results by comparing their simulations to actual lakes on Earth. They found the same difference in shape between Earth lakes known to have been eroded by waves and lakes affected by uniform erosion, such as dissolving limestone. A shore's shape Their modeling revealed clear, characteristic shoreline shapes, depending on the mechanism by which they evolved. The team then wondered: Where would Titan's shorelines fit, within these characteristic shapes? In particular, they focused on four of Titan's largest, most well-mapped seas: Kraken Mare, which is comparable in size to the Caspian Sea; Ligeia Mare, which is larger than Lake Superior; Punga Mare, which is longer than Lake Victoria; and Ontario Lacus, which is about 20 percent the size of its terrestrial namesake. The team mapped the shorelines of each Titan sea using Cassini's radar images, and then applied their modeling to each of the sea's shorelines to see which erosion mechanism best explained their shape. They found that all four seas fit solidly in the wave-driven erosion model, meaning that waves produced shorelines that most closely resembled Titan's four seas. "We found that if the coastlines have eroded, their shapes are more consistent with erosion by waves than by uniform erosion or no erosion at all," Perron says. The researchers are working to determine how strong Titan's winds must be in order to stir up waves that could repeatedly chip away at the coasts. They also hope to decipher, from the shape of Titan's shorelines, from which directions the wind is predominantly blowing. "Titan presents this case of a completely untouched system," Palermo says. "It could help us learn more fundamental things about how coasts erode without the influence of people, and maybe that can help us better manage our coastlines on Earth in the future." This work was supported in part by NASA, the National Science Foundation, the USGS, and the Heising-Simons Foundation.

Anqa is located just across the Syrian border from Dura-Europos, in the present-day Al-Qaim district of the Anbar Governorate in Iraq. Its remains include an identifying tell mound, at the northern end of the site, a polygonal inner wall circuit, and a large outer defensive wall, or enceinte. Situated at a point where the Euphrates floodplain drastically narrows, the city would have controlled movement between the populous section of the valley upstream and the trade route downstream linking Syria, Northern Mesopotamia, and Babylonia, giving it great strategic and economic significance. However, the site was ignored entirely by archaeologists until the 1850 publication of a British Middle Euphrates expedition survey. A more thorough study of the site was performed in the late 1930s by Aurel Stein, including aerial photographs of the standing structures, but even after these forays, there was little desire to learn more than the geographical location of this twin city to Dura-Europos. One reason for the disparity in interest between Anqa and Dura-Europos, posits article author Simon James, is the history of British and French colonial intervention in the region. In 1920, as a result of the San Remo conference, Iraq was seized for British control, and Syria for French. As James writes, the "new political, military, and administrative boundary created a barrier to research and understanding of the earlier history of the region as a whole." Yet while Dura-Europos and some other sites in Iraq and Syria have suffered from looting, destruction, and civilian death as a consequence of conflict in the region, Anqa has remained relatively untouched. As further archaeological inquiry is performed, Anqa may continue to provide valuable insight into the history of the Middle Euphrates. And furthermore, as methods of digital scholarship bring thinkers together "despite political borders," the practice of studying sites like it may even, in the words of Simon James, help "address the consequences of colonialism in archaeology."

Innovative geospatial and AI technologies offer ground-breaking solutions and insights into the dynamic changes occurring in our natural and social surroundings. The applications of GeoAI are rapidly expanding across various fields, encompassing transportation, urban and public safety, planning, climate change and natural disasters. Prof. Qihao WENG, Chair Professor of Geomatics and Artificial Intelligence of the Department of Land Surveying and Geo-Informatics, and Global STEM Professor, established the PolyU Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence in Geomatics (RCAIG), to focus on the development of original and innovative AI methodologies and technologies for geomatics and their applications in urban areas, with the goal of it becoming a global R&D hub in GeoAI. Prof. Weng has recently been honoured with the 2024 American Association of Geographers (AAG) Wilbanks Prize for Transformational Research in Geography and the 2024 AAG Remote Sensing Specialty Group Lifetime Achievement Honor Award for his ground-breaking contributions in geography. Earth observations Prof. WENG said, "By leveraging the latest geospatial technology and AI, we stand at the forefront of addressing global environmental and societal challenges. Our research encompasses a wide spectrum of subjects in the fields of earth observations and geoinformatics." Satellite observations are invaluable tools for our community, relying on satellite imagery, videos and data that are crucial for informed decision-making in urban resilience and public health. For instance, satellite observations help us understand the impact of extreme heatwave on population exposure and aid in the development of urban flood monitoring algorithms. Real-time data acquisition also facilitate applications in traffic conditions, air quality, nature disasters, population movement and urban land use. Prof. WENG said, "Earth observation is important as a guiding compass for understanding changes in the environment and society. Our research focuses on diverse fields including Geospatial big data and AI, remote sensing, ground-based sensors, navigation and positioning, surveying and geodesy, laser scanning and photogrammetry. These technologies play a crucial role in addressing and resolving key issues." In particular, GeoAI has revolutionised building monitoring by utilising thousands of learnable parameters. An illustration of this is its ability to automatically learn and identify general patterns of buildings such as colour and shape. This technology is crucially applied to detect disaster-damaged buildings, retrieve building height, identify structural changes, and estimate building energy consumption. As a result, GeoAI has emerged as a mainstream solution for more efficient and insightful building monitoring. Environmental monitoring As the world rapidly urbanises, cities become the focal point of diverse aspects of human development, including building and environmental monitoring, conservation efforts, urban safety, and the impacts of climate change. By leveraging AI techniques like deep neural networks, alongside with remote sensing methods, these technologies have the ability to detect and track changes such as in habitats, urbanisation and deforestation patterns. Additionally, monitoring the uptake of carbon by vegetation plays a crucial role in combating climate change and developing effective mitigation strategies. For urban resilience and public health, these technologies aim to enhance the ability of urban areas to withstand and recover from various challenges such as extreme heatwaves, while promoting the well-being and sustainable development of urban population. In the field of urbanisation monitoring, research team of the RCAIG has developed an impervious surface area (ISA) based urban cellular automata (CA) model that can simulate the fractional change of urban areas within each grid by utilising annual urban extent time series data obtained from satellite observations. By characterising the historical pathways of urban area growth under different levels of urbanisation, the model offers more detailed insights compared to traditional binary CA models. This demonstrates its great potential in supporting sustainable development. Research conducted by Ms Wanru HE, an RCAIG doctoral research assistant and the team, titled "Modeling gridded urban fractional change using the temporal context information in the urban cellular automata model" was published on Cities . Their model effectively capture the dynamics of urban sprawl with significantly improved computational efficiency and performance, and it enables the modelling of urban growth at regional even global level, under diverse future urbanisation scenarios. GeoAI for traffic management GeoAI utilises machine learning and deep learning to effectively analyse intricate information, offering applications like real-time traffic management. Through the integration of diverse data modalities, such as text, images, and knowledge graphs, GeoAI enables accurate traffic flow prediction, route optimisation, accident warnings, and the planning of an efficient traffic network. Consequently, this contributes to the advancement of smart traffic management. To enhance the efficiency of ride-hailing platforms and achieve intelligent management of their services, research team of the RCAIG has developed a multi-agent order matching and vehicle repositioning (MAMR) approach. This innovative technology focuses on coordinating the supply and demand of ride-hailing services, ultimately aiming to improve their overall efficiency. This approach provides a ground-breaking solution to tackle two critical aspects of efficient ride-hailing services. Firstly, it addresses order matching by efficiently assigning orders to available vehicles. Secondly, it incorporates proactive vehicle repositioning, strategically deploying idle vehicles to regions with potentially high demand. Based on multi-agent deep reinforcement learning (MARL), this innovation solves the complex planning in transportation and offers a news perspective on long-term spatiotemporal planning problem. The research conducted by Ms Mingyue XU, another RCAIG researcher and the team, titled "Multi-agent reinforcement learning to unify order-matching and vehicle-repositioning in ride-hailing services," was published on International Journal of Geographical Information Science. The study demonstrated outperforming results, including reduced passenger rejection rates and driver idle time. With a focus on geospatial artificial intelligence (GeoAI), the RCAIG and the POLEIS at PolyU are dedicated to conducting research in diverse fields, including urban building and energy, urban safety and securing, environmental monitoring and conservation and urban resilience and public health. This aligns with the 11th United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (SDG11), which aims to create inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable cities and human settlements. About RCAIG The research focus of RCAIG is on exploring and applying AI in geomatics. In particular, GeoAI represents the fusion of AI with geospatial data and technology, utilising a multidisciplinary approach to analyse, predict and visualise complex patterns within geospatial data. Its significance lies in its ability to provide profound insights and more accurate results compared to conventional geospatial techniques.

"While it has been recognized that shallowing groundwater will eventually result in chronic flooding as it surfaces, what's less known is that it can start causing problems decades beforehand as groundwater interacts with buried infrastructure," said Shellie Habel, lead author and coastal geologist in the School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST) at UH Manoa. "This knowledge gap often results in coastal groundwater changes being fully overlooked in infrastructure planning." The research team aimed to create awareness about these issues and offer guidance from world experts on managing them. Habel and co-authors reviewed existing literature to examine the diverse effects on different types of infrastructure. Additionally, by employing worldwide elevation data and geospatial data that indicate the extent of urban development, they identified 1,546 low-lying coastal cities and towns globally, where around 1.42 billion people live, that are likely experiencing these impacts. "The IPCC 6th Assessment Report tells us that sea level rise is an unstoppable and irreversible reality for centuries to millennia," said Chip Fletcher, study co-author, interim Dean of SOEST, and director of the Climate Resilience Collaborative (CRC) at UH Manoa. "Now is the time to prepare for the challenges posed by this problem by redesigning our communities for greater resilience and social equity." Concealed damage Well before the visible effects of surface flooding, sea-level rise pushes up the water table and shifts salty water landward. With this, the subsurface environment becomes more corrosive to critical underground infrastructure networks -- buried drainage and sewage lines can become compromised and mobilize urban contamination, and building foundations can weaken. Extensive research conducted by the CRC has substantiated that critical infrastructure around the world, including drainage and basements, is likely currently experiencing flooding from rising groundwater levels. "The damage caused by sea level rise-influenced coastal groundwater is often concealed and not immediately perceptible," said Habel, who is based at the CRC and Hawai'i Sea Grant in SOEST. "As a result, it tends to be overlooked in infrastructure management and planning efforts." Informing management strategies The study authors emphasize the importance of research efforts that can contribute to informed adaptation strategies. "Being aware of these hidden impacts of sea level rise is of significant importance for the State of Hawai'i due to the concentration of communities situated along low-lying coastal zones where groundwater is generally very shallow," said Habel. The CRC actively collaborates with partners across the nation and infrastructure managers in Hawai'i to gain a comprehensive assessment of how vital infrastructure, encompassing pipe networks, roadways, and buildings, is impacted. Understanding the impacts and risks associated with sea level rise-influenced coastal groundwater enables more effective management and adaptation.

A rustic camp in northeast Greenland was one of the bases for deploying autonomous measuring devices with modern radar technology by helicopter in a part of the 79° N-Glacier that is difficult to access. Measurement flights with the polar aircraft of the Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) and satellite data were also incorporated into a scientific study that has now been published in the scientific journal The Cryosphere . This study examines how global warming affects the stability of a floating ice tongue. This is of great importance for the remaining ice shelves in Greenland as well as those in Antarctica, as instability of the ice shelf usually results in an acceleration of the ice flow, which would lead to a greater sea level rise. "Since 2016, we have been using autonomous instruments to carry out radar measurements on the 79° N-Glacier, from which we can determine melt and thinning rates," says AWI glaciologist Dr Ole Zeising, the first author of the publication. "In addition, we used aircraft radar data from 1998, 2018 and 2021 showing changes in ice thickness. We were able to measure that the 79° N-Glacier has changed significantly in recent decades under the influence of global warming." The study shows how the combination of a warm ocean inflow and a warming atmosphere affects the floating ice tongue of the 79° N-Glacier in northeast Greenland. Only recently, an AWI oceanography team published a modelling study on this subject. The unique data set of observations now presented shows that extremely high melt rates occur over a large area near the transition to the ice sheet. In addition, large channels form on the underside of the ice from the land side, probably because the water from huge lakes drains through the glacier ice. Both processes have led to a strong thinning of the glacier in recent decades. Due to extreme melt rates, the ice of the floating glacier tongue has become 32 % thinner since 1998, especially from the grounding line where the ice comes into contact with the ocean. In addition, a 500-metre-high channel has formed on the underside of the ice, which spreads towards the inland. The researchers attribute these changes to warm ocean currents in the cavity below the floating tongue and to the runoff of surface meltwater as a result of atmospheric warming. A surprising finding was that melt rates have decreased since 2018. A possible cause for this is a colder ocean inflow. "The fact that this system reacts on such short time scales is astonishing for systems that are actually inert such as glaciers," says Prof Dr Angelika Humbert, who is also involved in the study. "We expect that this floating glacier tongue will break apart over the next few years to decades," explains the AWI glaciologist. "We have begun to study this process in detail to gain maximum insight into the course of the process. Although there have been several such disintegrations of ice shelves, we have only been able to collect data subsequently. As a scientific community, we are now in a better position by having built up a really good database before the collapse."

Particularly hard hit population centers such as New York City and Long Island, Baltimore, and Virginia Beach and Norfolk are seeing areas of rapid "subsidence," or sinking land, alongside more slowly sinking or relatively stable ground, increasing the risk to roadways, runways, building foundations, rail lines, and pipelines, according to a study published today in the Proceedings of the National Academies of Sciences . "Continuous unmitigated subsidence on the U.S. East Coast should cause concern," said lead author Leonard Ohenhen, a graduate student working with Associate Professor Manoochehr Shirzaei at Virginia Tech's Earth Observation and Innovation Lab. "This is particularly in areas with a high population and property density and a historical complacency toward infrastructure maintenance." Shirzaei and his research team pulled together a vast collection of data points measured by space-based radar satellites and used this highly accurate information to build digital terrain maps that show exactly where sinking landscapes present risks to the health of vital infrastructure. Using the publicly available satellite imagery, Shirzaei and Ohenhen measured millions of occurrences of land subsidence spanning multiple years. They then created some of the world's first high resolution depictions of the land subsidence. These groundbreaking new maps show that a large area of the East Coast is sinking at least 2 mm per year, with several areas along the mid-Atlantic coast of up to 3,700 square kilometers, or more than 1,400 square miles, sinking more than 5 mm per year, more than the current 4 mm per year global rate of sea level rise. "We measured subsidence rates of 2 mm per year affecting more than 2 million people and 800,000 properties on the East Coast," Shirzaei said. "We know to some extent that the land is sinking. Through this study, we highlight that sinking of the land is not an intangible threat. It affects you and I and everyone, it may be gradual, but the impacts are real." In several cities along the East Coast, multiple critical infrastructures such as roads, railways, airports, and levees are affected by differing subsidence rates. "Here, the problem is not just that the land is sinking. The problem is that the hotspots of sinking land intersect directly with population and infrastructure hubs," said Ohenhen. "For example, significant areas of critical infrastructure in New York, including JFK and LaGuardia airports and its runways, along with the railway systems, are affected by subsidence rates exceeding 2 mm per year. The effects of these right now and into the future are potential damage to infrastructure and increased flood risks." The new findings appear in the open access journal PNAS Nexus. In the work "Slowly but surely: Exposure of communities and infrastructure to subsidence on the US east coast," Virginia Tech and U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) scientists measured how much the land along the East Coast has sunk and which areas, populations, and critical infrastructure within 100 km of the coast are at risk of land subsidence. Subsidence can undermine building foundations; damage roads, gas, and water lines; cause building collapse; and exacerbate coastal flooding -- especially when paired with sea level rise caused by climate change. "This information is needed. No one else is providing it," said Patrick Barnard, a research geologist with the USGS and co-author of the study. "Shirzaei and his Virginia Tech team stepped into that niche with his technical expertise and is providing something extremely valuable."

"The majority of our simulated flooding areas are located in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, with the hotspots in the lagoons of Fischland-Darß-Zingst, Rügen, Usedom and the Peene estuary. In Schleswig-Holstein, the Flensburg Fjord, Eckernförde Bay, Fehmarn, Travemünde and Lübeck are particularly affected," says first author Dr Joshua Kiesel, postdoctoral researcher in the Coastal Risks and Sea Level Rise working group at the Institute of Geography at Kiel University. Professor Athanasios Vafeidis, co-author of both studies and member of the research priority area Kiel Marine Science (KMS) at Kiel University, leads the working group. "Today, we can still decide for a large part of the German Baltic Sea coast what an adaptation might look like in the future. The known disadvantages of existing dikes should definitely be taken into account," says Vafeidis. According to the researcher of Kiel University, this is also crucial for protection against future extreme events, which are very likely to become more frequent. Process-based modelling helps to evaluate adaptation scenarios Today, nature-based adaptation options are becoming increasingly important. One example of this is managed realignment, which aims to create a natural buffer zone between the sea and the dike. In this buffer zone, coastal wetlands can (re)establish, whose vegetation increases the surface roughness and thus makes a natural contribution to coastal protection. Rare habitats such as salt marshes and reed beds can develop in these buffer zones, which also contribute to the preservation of biodiversity. Previous models simulate flooding according to the principle of a uniform spread of water when storm surges hit the coast. In the current, process-based modelling, the researchers now also take into account the temporal course of storm surges as well as the attenuation of the surge with its currents and peak water levels when it hits areas of varying roughness, such as wetlands, forests or paved soils. "Compared to previous supra-regional or continental studies, our coastal flooding model is the first to use high-resolution terrain data from state and regional dikes with a resolution of one metre for the entire German Baltic Sea coast. This enabled us to assess the effectiveness of existing and raised dikes on the one hand and of managed realignment on the other. However, based on current defence lines, both will probably not be sufficient to withstand the ongoing sea level rise," says coastal geographer Kiesel. However, Kiesel and the research team estimate that the protection potential for managed realignment, including raising them, is greater than raising them without realignment. "Managed realignment means that existing dike lines are breached to reestablish regular flooding and sedimentation of low lying areas. This approach typically involves the construction of a new dike line further inland to protect adjacent people, buildings and infrastructure. There are already several examples of managed realignment along the German Baltic coast," says the scientist. During very high surges, the slightly improved coastal protection function is due to the significantly longer, landward dike line. In order to identify physically plausible areas for managed realignment, the scientists based their study on several parameters: no direct development behind the dike and no infrastructure in the form of roads or railway networks. In order to compare the effectiveness of dike relocation with conventional coastal protection, all state and regional dikes along the German Baltic Sea coast were also raised by 1.5 metres in accordance with the climate dike concept. "There is a broad scientific debate about managed realignment and nature-based adaptation options in general. However, there has been little research into their effectiveness in terms of coastal protection. Our research fills a gap here. We wanted to know what contribution managed realignment can make to regional coastal protection if it is implemented wherever it is physically possible," says Kiesel. For this reason, socio-economic considerations and the frequent lack of acceptance among the population for such measures, which also involve interventions in the infrastructure, were not taken into account. Flood maps for the German Baltic Sea coast In their first study from September 2023, around a month before the severe storm surge, the research team led by Kiesel and Vafeidis had already been able to prove with two high end sea level rise scenarios that the entire German Baltic Sea coast is at high risk of flooding and that upgrades to coastal protection are necessary. To do this, they coupled a model of the western Baltic Sea with a coastal flooding model. The spatial information on dikes and vegetation usually requires good local knowledge and cooperation with the authorities. "Without our transdisciplinary approach, we would not have been able to provide our flood maps in this resolution," adds co-author Vafeidis, whose working group works closely with the state authorities. "Now, not later": More research into adaptation concepts With the climate dike concept of the state of Schleswig-Holstein and the planned dike constructions along the German Baltic Sea coast, the first coastal protection measures are already underway. Kiesel, who now works as a research assistant at the Free University of Amsterdam, would like to continue working closely together in the future: "We need more research into the effectiveness of nature-based adaptation options. The dramatic events of the Baltic Sea storm surge have shown that we should start today if possible. Successive storm surges in a short period of time could also become more frequent in the future. The infrastructure already weakened by the first storm surge would be much more vulnerable to subsequent events, with even worse consequences for the people on the coast." Developing new and effective adaptation concepts are a challenge that not only countries and people on the German Baltic coast are facing. Such risks are also increasing in Europe. Vafeidis' working group is researching European solutions in the EU Horizon 2020 project "Coastal Climate Core Services" (CoCliCo).

In the study, published October in the journal Nature Communications , researchers from DRI, Colorado State University, and the Missouri University of Science and Technology examined how groundwater extraction is driving land subsidence and aquifer collapse. "Our study puts land subsidence happening from excessive groundwater pumping to a global context," said Fahim Hasan, a Ph.D. candidate at Colorado State University and the study's lead author. By combining publicly available data with the predictive capabilities of computer modeling, they found global aquifer storage capacity is disappearing at a rate of approximately 17 km 3 per year (about the size of 7,000 Great Pyramids of Giza). This loss of groundwater storage is permanent, forever reducing the amount of water that can be captured and stored. Approximately 75% of this subsidence is occurring over cropland and urban regions, underscoring the importance of improving groundwater management globally. "With this study, we wanted to understand land subsidence dynamics globally, and at a sufficiently high resolution to help local management authorities," says Sayantan Majumdar, Ph.D., assistant research professor of hydrologic sciences and remote sensing at DRI who co-authored the study. To identify and quantify how much land is subsiding due to groundwater pumping in regions where no data is available, the team utilized advanced machine learning techniques. They first compiled all the publicly available information they could find from federal and state agencies and scientific studies. Then, they used this data to build a computer model that can use risk factors for land subsidence, like land use and climate data, to produce statistical predictions for ground subsidence in other regions. They tested the accuracy of the model's predictive capacity by assessing how well it predicted subsidence in regions where subsidence has been verified. In this way, they could expand the study to include rural and little-studied regions around the world. "Most regions of the world do not have monitoring programs for groundwater pumping," Majumdar says. "This kind of data is crucial for helping understand the issue on a global scale." The study found that the United States, China, and Iran account for most of the global groundwater storage loss, with some regions experiencing more than 5 cm/year of land subsidence. California ,and Arizona show significant land subsidence due to the arid region's reliance on groundwater to irrigate crops. In places like Mexico City, subsidence is more strongly tied to urban groundwater use. The research also predicts high land subsidence rates in both irrigated and urban regions of Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, and Syria, where no previous data has documented the impacts of groundwater withdrawal. Although the study predicts that most of Europe is experiencing low rates of land subsidence of less than 1 cm/year, the authors note that even this amount can cause damage to infrastructure and create issues for coastal regions that are also threatened by sea level rise. Additional consequences of land subsidence include arsenic contamination and saltwater intrusion, both of which can impact the quality of the remaining groundwater. The problem is not limited to arid regions, the study authors note, with subsidence mapped throughout humid climates like Bangladesh, India, and Vietnam. This underscores a high reliance on groundwater even in regions where rainfall is plentiful. The scientists hope that water managers can use their data to understand the scale, and extent, of groundwater storage loss occurring in their region.

Rivers generally come in two styles: braided, where multiple channels flow around sandy bars, and meandering, where a single channel cuts S-curves across a landscape. Geologists have long thought that before vegetation, rivers predominantly ran in braided patterns, only forming meandering shapes after plant life took root and stabilized riverbanks. The new study, which was published online by the journal Science on Aug. 21, 2025, suggests the theory that braided rivers dominated the first 4 billion years of Earth's history is based on a misinterpretation of the geological record. The research demonstrates that unvegetated meandering rivers can leave sedimentary deposits that look deceptively similar to those of braided rivers. This distinction is crucial for our understanding of Earth's early ecology and climate, as a river's type determines how long sediment, carbon, and nutrients are stored in floodplains. "With our study, we're pushing back on the widely accepted story of what landscapes looked like when plant life first evolved on land," said lead author Michael Hasson, a PhD student in Mathieu Lapôtre's lab at the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability. "We're rewriting the story of the intertwined relationship between plants and rivers, which is a significant revision to our understanding of the history of the Earth." The muddy floodplains of meandering rivers - dynamic ecosystems created over thousands of years by river overflow - are among the planet's most abundant non-marine carbon reservoirs. Carbon levels in the atmosphere, in the form of carbon dioxide, act as Earth's thermostat, regulating temperature over vast timescales. Accurately budgeting for the carbon caches created by meandering rivers could help scientists build more comprehensive models of Earth's ancient and future climate. "Floodplains play an important role in determining how, when, and whether carbon is buried or released back into the atmosphere," Hasson said. "Based on this work, we argue carbon storage in floodplains would have been common for much longer than the classic paradigm that assumes meandering rivers only occurred over the last several hundred million years." Where the river flows To gauge vegetation's impact on river channel patterns, the researchers examined satellite imagery of about 4,500 bends in 49 current-day meandering rivers. About half of the rivers were unvegetated and half were densely or partly vegetated. The researchers keyed in on point bars - the sandy landforms that develop on the inside bends of meandering rivers as water flow deposits sediments. Unlike the sandy bars that form in the middle of braided rivers, point bars tend to migrate laterally away from the centers of rivers. Over time, this migration contributes to meandering rivers' characteristically sinuous channel shapes. Recognizing that these sandy bars form in different places based on river style, geologists for decades have measured the trajectory of bars in the rock record to reveal ancient river paths. The rocks, typically of sandstones and mudstones, provide evidence for divergent river styles because each deposits different kinds of and amounts of rock-forming sediment, giving geologists clues for reconstructing long-ago river geometries. If sandstones showed little variation in the angle of bar migration, geologists interpreted the bars as moving downstream, and thus that a braided river created the deposits. Using this technique, geologists had noticed that rivers changed the way they behaved around the time that plants first evolved on Earth. This observation led to the conclusion that land plants made river meandering possible, for instance by trapping sediment and stabilizing riverbanks. "In our paper, we show that this conclusion - which is taught in all geology curricula to this day - is most likely incorrect," said Lapôtre, the paper's senior author and an assistant professor of earth and planetary sciences at the Doerr School of Sustainability. By looking at modern rivers with a wide range of vegetation cover, the researchers showed that plants consistently change the direction of point bar migration. Specifically, in the absence of vegetation, point bars tend to migrate downstream - like mid-channel bars do in braided rivers. "In other words, we show that, if one were to use the same criterion geologists use in ancient rocks on modern rivers, meandering rivers would be miscategorized as braided rivers," Lapôtre said. Rivers over time The findings offer a provocative new window into Earth's past eons, upending the conventional picture of how rivers have sculpted continents. If indeed carbon-loaded floodplains were laid down far more extensively over history, scientists may need to revise models of major natural climate swings over time, with implications for our understanding of ongoing climate change. "Understanding how our planet is going to respond to human-induced climate change hinges on having an accurate baseline for how it has responded to past perturbations," Hasson said. "The rock record provides that baseline, but it's only useful if we interpret it accurately." "We're suggesting that an important control on carbon cycling - where carbon is stored, and for how long, due to river type and floodplain creation - hasn't been fully understood," he said. "Our study now points the way to better assessments." Additional co-authors are from the University of Padova and the University of British Columbia.

That rise in oxygen coincided with a period of remarkable diversification among fish with jaws — the ancestors of most vertebrates alive today. The finding suggests that oxygenation might have shaped evolutionary patterns among prehistoric species. “It’s known that oxygen is a necessary condition for animal evolution, but the extent to which it is the sufficient condition that can explain trends in animal diversification has been difficult to pin down,” said co-lead author Michael Kipp, assistant professor of earth and climate sciences in the Duke University Nicholas School of the Environment. “This study gives a strong vote that oxygen dictated the timing of early animal evolution, at least for the appearance of jawed vertebrates in deep-ocean habitats.” For a time, researchers thought that deep-ocean oxygenation occurred once at the beginning of the Paleozoic Era, some 540 million years ago. But more recent studies have suggested that oxygenation occurred in phases, with nearshore waters first becoming livable to breathing organisms, followed by deeper environments. Kipp and colleagues homed in on the timing of those phases by studying sedimentary rocks that formed under deep seawater. Specifically, they analyzed the rocks for selenium, an element that can be used to determine whether oxygen existed at life-sustaining levels in ancient seas. In the marine environment, selenium occurs in different forms called isotopes that vary by weight. Where oxygen levels are high enough to support animal life, the ratio of heavy to light selenium isotopes varies widely. But at oxygen levels prohibitive to most animal life, that ratio is relatively consistent. By determining the ratio of selenium isotopes in marine sediments, researchers can infer whether oxygen levels were sufficient to support animals that breathe underwater. Working with research repositories around the world, the team assembled 97 rock samples dating back 252 to 541 million years ago. The rocks had been excavated from areas across five continents that, hundreds of millions of years ago, were located along the outermost continental shelves — the edges of continents as they protrude underwater, just before giving way to steep drop-offs. After a series of steps that entailed pulverizing the rocks, dissolving the resulting powder and purifying selenium, the team analyzed the ratio of selenium isotopes that occurred in each sample. Their data indicated that two oxygenation events occurred in the deeper waters of the outer continental shelves: a transient episode around 540 million years ago, during a Paleozoic period known as the Cambrian, and an episode that began 393-382 million years ago, during an interval called the Middle Devonian, that has continued to this day. During the intervening millennia, oxygen dropped to levels inhospitable to most animals. The team published their findings in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in August. “The selenium data tell us that the second oxygenation event was permanent. It began in the Middle Devonian and persisted in our younger rock samples,” said co-lead author Kunmanee “Mac” Bubphamanee, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Washington. That event coincided with numerous changes in oceanic evolution and ecosystems — what some researchers refer to as the “mid-Paleozoic marine revolution.” As oxygen became a permanent feature in deeper settings, jawed fish, called gnathostomes, and other animals began invading and diversifying in such habitats, according to the fossil record. Animals also got bigger, perhaps because oxygen supported their growth. The Middle Devonian oxygenation event also overlapped with the spread of plants with hard stems of wood. “Our thinking is that, as these woody plants increased in number, they released more oxygen into the air, which led to more oxygen in deeper ocean environments,” said Kipp, who began this research as a Ph.D. student at the University of Washington. The cause of the first, temporary oxygenation event during the Cambrian is more enigmatic. “What seems clear is that the drop in oxygen after that initial pulse hindered the spread and diversification of marine animals into those deeper environments of the outer continental shelves,” Kipp said. Though the team’s focus was on ancient ocean conditions, their findings are relevant now. “Today, there’s abundant ocean oxygen in equilibrium with the atmosphere. But in some locations, ocean oxygen can drop to undetectable levels. Some of these zones occur through natural processes. But in many cases, they’re driven by nutrients draining off continents from fertilizers and industrial activity that fuel plankton blooms that suck up oxygen when they decay,” Kipp said. “This work shows very clearly the link between oxygen and animal life in the ocean. This was a balance struck about 400 million years ago, and it would be a shame to disrupt it today in a matter of decades.” Funding: MAK was supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship and Agouron Institute Postdoctoral Fellowship. Additional support was provided by the NASA Astrobiology Institute’s Virtual Planetary Laboratory.

This crucial piece of work, which showed sediments changed in multiple sites east of the mid-Atlantic ridge but not west of that important geographical feature, opens multiple doors to future research aimed at better understanding the link between deep water currents, Atlantic Ocean heat and salt distribution and ice-sheet expansion, and climatic change. The new work, just published in leading international journal Nature Communications was led by Dr Matthias Sinnesael from Trinity College Dublin's School of Natural Sciences and Dr Boris Karatsolis from Vrije Universiteit Brussel. "In recent decades, humanity has increasingly felt the impacts of global warming," said Dr Sinnesael. "From rising sea levels that endanger coastal cities to heatwaves and floods, the world is currently living within the 'storm' of extreme weather events. Collectively, the short-term daily-to-monthly changes in weather that persist over long periods, eventually become part of the climate, which constitutes the long-term average state of these weather conditions. At the same time, changes in climate can act in timescales larger than humanity itself, influenced by complex interactions between various processes like plate tectonics, greenhouse gases, biotic evolution, and ocean circulation patterns." Climate researchers around the world aim to understand these long-term processes and the effect they have on climate, as well as to decouple them from the ones humans are inducing,. To do that, they target major climatic systems (e.g., icesheets, river and ocean basins) and look for clues of their evolution in past periods of Earth's history. One of the most crucial systems for Earth's climate is the ocean "conveyor belt" -- a set of currents that act together to redistribute heat on the global ocean. The Gulf Stream is the upper limb of this belt, known for bringing warm waters from the tropics to higher latitudes, resulting in the relatively mild climate that western Europe is experiencing today. The lower limb of the "conveyor belt" acts in the deeper ocean and consists of three main systems of southward flowing currents, the Iceland Scotland Overflow Water (ISOW), the Denmark Strait Overflow water (DSOW) and the Labrador Sea Water (LSW). Together, they form the return flow known as the North Atlantic deep water (NADW). Dr Karatsolis said: "Concerns have been growing that the conveyor belt is slowing down due to ocean warming and ice melting, with serious implications for all life on Earth and in the oceans." "To be able to predict how -- and why -- these changes may occur, we first need to understand what happened when things shifted in the deep past. Our chief aim with this work was to reconstruct the past activity of the "conveyor belt" during a period of Earth's history when temperatures and CO 2 concentrations were higher than today but similar to the ones projected for the next hundreds of years." Drs Sinnesael and Karatsolis led this study as part of an international, multidisciplinary project, implemented by the International Ocean Discovery Program. The project, with the code name "IODP Expedition 395/395C," involved two seagoing research expeditions in the North Atlantic (summer of 2021 and 2023) and focused on recovering and investigating deep sea sediments. These sediments are nowadays transported in the bottom of the ocean by strong deep-sea currents related to the lower limb of the "conveyor belt" (ISOW and DSOW) and therefore hold information about the activity of the NADW in hundred-to-million-year timescales. Although this area had been previously drilled, "IODP Expeditions 395C/395" managed to go deeper and therefore investigate the sediment deposition during a warmer-than-present period of Earth's history that occurred roughly 5 to 2.8 million years ago. Key Results After analysing the composition and the physical properties of the sediments, the scientists noticed a remarkable change in the type of sediments they were retrieving: a pale looking carbonate mud very sharply transitioned into a dark grey pile of fine silt and clay particles. Interestingly, they kept finding the same change in multiple sites located to the east of mid-Atlantic ridge, all related to the ISOW deep current system. In contrast, the sites west of the mid-Atlantic ridge do not show much change, looking rather the same throughout the studied interval. Dr Sinnesael added: "After detailed further investigations in turns out that the changes seen in sediments east of the mid-Atlantic ridge all happened around the same time -- about 3.6 million years ago. The timing of this change is intriguing as it coincides with a period of strong cooling and the development of large ice bodies on the Northern Hemisphere." "We must be careful not to infer a cause and effect relationship before we understand the system more completely, but the most intuitive way to interpret the change in the type of sediment is to assume it reflects a fundamental shift in ocean circulation in the North Atlantic Ocean, which is likely related to strong formation of deep-water currents -- much like we know them today -- in the eastern part of the Atlantic Ocean." "Further research will refine our understanding of the link between deep ocean circulation and the development of contemporaneous ice sheets, and help us predict what is likely to come in the future."

The study was published this week in the journal Nature Cities . "As cities continue to grow, we will see more cities expand into subsiding regions," said lead author Leonard Ohenhen, a postdoctoral researcher at the Columbia Climate School's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. "Over time, this subsidence can produce stresses on infrastructure that will go past their safety limit." Rapidly subsiding coastal metropolises such as Jakarta, Venice and New Orleans have already drawn major attention, and multiple recent studies have shown that many places along the U.S. East Coast and elsewhere are subsiding. But most studies have relied on relatively sparse data spread over wide areas to paint a broad picture. Looking at all U.S. cities with populations exceeding 600,000, the new study uses recent satellite data to map out vertical land movements down to the millimeter in grids measuring just 28 meters (about 90 feet) square. The authors found that in 25 of the 28 cities, two-thirds or more of their area is sinking. Overall, about 34 million people live in affected areas. The fastest-sinking city is Houston, with more than 40% of its area subsiding more than 5 millimeters (about 1/5 inch) per year, and 12% sinking at twice that rate. Some localized spots are going down as much as 5 centimeters (2 inches) per year. Two other Texas cities, Fort Worth and Dallas, are not far behind. Some localized fast-sinking zones in other places include areas around New York's LaGuardia Airport, and parts of Las Vegas, Washington, D.C. and San Francisco. In addition to measuring surface-elevation changes, the researchers analyzed county-level groundwater withdrawals for the affected areas. Correlating this with land movements, they determined that groundwater removal for human use was the cause for 80% of overall sinkage. Generally, this happens as water is withdrawn from aquifers made up of fine-grained sediments; unless the aquifer is replenished, the pore spaces formerly occupied by water can eventually collapse, leading to compaction below, and sinkage at the surface. In Texas, the problem is exacerbated by pumping of oil and gas, the paper says. The researchers say that continued population growth and water usage combined with climate-induced droughts in some areas will likely worsen subsidence in the future. In some areas, natural forces are at work. In particular, the weight of the towering ice sheet that occupied much of interior North America until about 20,000 years ago made the land along its edges bulge upward, somewhat like when one squeezes air from one part of a balloon to another. Even today, with the ice long gone, some of these bulges are still subsiding at rates of 1 to 3 millimeters each year. Affected cities include New York, Indianapolis, Nashville, Philadelphia, Denver, Chicago and Portland. Even the sheer weight of buildings may be taking a toll. One 2023 study found that New York's more than 1 million buildings are pressing down on the Earth so hard that they may be contributing to the city's ongoing subsidence. A more recent separate study found that some buildings in the Miami area are sinking in part due to disruptions in the subsurface caused by construction of newer buildings nearby. The new study found that eight cities (New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Houston, Philadelphia, San Antonio and Dallas) account for more than 60% of the people living on sinking land. Notably, these eight cities have seen more than 90 significant floods since 2000, probably driven in part by lowering topography. Another key finding: some cities are seeing differential motion, with adjoining localities sinking at different rates, or even sinking while other areas rise; the upward motion possibly caused by quick recharge of aquifers near rivers or other water sources. (Uplift in certain areas is actually more than compensating for overall sinkage in three cities: Jacksonville, Fla.; Memphis, Tenn. and San Jose, Calif.) Differential motion is a problem because, as the authors point out, if a whole urban area is moving up or down evenly at the same rate, that minimizes the danger of stresses to building foundations and other infrastructure. But if structures are subjected to an array of uneven vertical movements, they can experience dangerous tilting. "Unlike flood-related subsidence hazards, where risks manifest only when high rates of subsidence lower the land elevation below a critical threshold, subsidence-induced infrastructure damage can occur even with minor changes in land motion," the authors write. The study found that only about 1% of the total land area in the 28 cities lies within zones where differential motion could affect buildings, roads, rail lines and other structures. However, these areas tend to be in the densest urban cores, and currently contain some 29,000 buildings. The most hazardous cities in this regard are San Antonio, where the researchers say 1 in 45 buildings are subject to high risk; Austin (1 in 71); Fort Worth (1 in 143) and Memphis (1 in 167). The upshot for individual structures in these areas is unclear; it probably would require an even finer-grained study, said Ohenhen. An earlier study of 225 U.S. building collapses between 1989 and 2000 found that only 2% were directly attributable to subsidence. However, the factors behind 30% were designated unknown, suggesting that subsidence could have played a larger role, says the new study. The paper concludes that cities should use this new information to focus on solutions. They say that in many places, flooding can be mitigated with land raising, enhanced drainage systems and green infrastructure such as artificial wetlands to absorb floodwaters. Cities susceptible to tilting hazards can focus on retrofitting existing structures, integrating land motions into building codes, and limiting new building in the areas of most threat. "As opposed to just saying it's a problem, we can respond, address, mitigate, adapt," said Ohenhen. "We have to move to solutions." The study was coauthored by researchers from Virginia Tech, the Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research, University of California Berkeley, Texas A&M University, University of Colorado Boulder, Brown University and United Nations University.

In the new research, geophysicists Tao Yuan and Shijie Zhong used computer simulations, or models, to travel back about 26,000 years into the planet's past. At the time, the massive Laurentide Ice Sheet, which stretched over North America as far south as Pennsylvania, started to recede. Melting ice flooded into the oceans, and sea levels worldwide rose by an average of around 1 centimeter per year. The scientists discovered that this global thaw may have also had unexpected consequences -- including for plate tectonics, or the internal clockwork that has, for billions of years, torn Earth's continents apart and crushed them together. According to the team's calculations, the motion of the North American continental plate may have sped up by 25% as the ice melted. Between about 12,000 to 6,000 years ago, spreading at the Mid-Atlantic Ocean Ridge, which sits between the North American and Eurasian plates, may have increased by as much as 40%. "As ice volume was greatly reduced, it caused a huge motion in Earth's crust," said Yuan, a graduate student in the Department of Physics at CU boulder. "Scientists knew that the ice melting caused the plates to uplift. But we show that they also moved a lot horizontally due to the ice melting." The researchers published their findings April 23 in the journal Nature . Their results may have implications for the planet today. Ice sheets over Greenland are once again melting at a rapid rate, which, in a strange twist, could drive an increase in volcanic eruptions in Iceland not far away. "That story that we've been telling for a long, long time -- that processes like seafloor spreading and continental drift operate at timescales of millions of years driven by Earth's internal engine, thermal convection," said Zhong, a professor of physics. "That's still true, but we show that glacial forcing can also cause significant motion on relatively short timescales of 10,000 years." Moving gears The research, which was funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation, takes a deep dive into the Mid-Atlantic Ocean Ridge. This feature runs for thousands of miles down the center of the Atlantic Ocean and cuts through the island of Iceland. It's a turbulent place: There, magma from deep within the planet bubbles up through the crust, cooling into solid rock and helping to force the continents of North America and Europe away from each other. For generations, scientists believed that this process was largely steady -- with the ridge spreading by a consistent 2 centimeters every year for the past several million years. "That's a fairly well-known, textbook number," Zhong said. But could the textbooks be wrong? To find out, Zhong and Yuan used computer models to recreate the Earth as it was thousands of years ago. The researchers simulated what might happen as glaciers that were kilometers thick disappeared from modern-day Canada and Greenland -- shifting that weight off dry land and into the ocean. It helps to picture the globe as a memory foam mattress. If you're lying on a mattress and get up, the foam will slowly bounce back to its original shape. Something similar happened on Earth as ice sheets melt, Zhong and Yuan said. As the weight of the Laurentide Ice Sheet was redistributed around the planet, parts of North America began to bounce back up. (Today, land around Canada's Hudson Bay is still rising by around 1 centimeter per year because of that rebound). According to the new study, the melting may have also affected the horizontal motion of North America and the Mid-Atlantic Ocean Ridge. Volcanic eruptions The thaw may also have had explosive consequences for Iceland, which sits not far away from Greenland, Yuan and Zhong said. Geological evidence, for example, suggests that the island underwent a period of intense volcanic activity at the end of the last Ice Age, which has since quieted down. Enhanced spreading at the Mid-Atlantic Ocean Ridge due to ice melting from Greenland may have contributed to that fiery past -- allowing more magma to rise to the surface, fueling the eruption of volcanoes and geysers. "This pattern of volcanism may have been partly due to the glacial melting that we studied," Zhong said. Today, ice over Greenland isn't melting fast enough to have much of an impact on the planet's continental drift. But it could still have a major influence on Iceland over the next several hundred years, especially if glaciers begin to disappear at an accelerating rate. "Ice sheets in Greenland and West Antarctica are still melting," Yuan said. "We think the ice melting could enhance seafloor spreading and volcanism at nearby mid-ocean ridges in the future."

The Empty Quarter, or Rub' al-Khali in Arabic, is one of the world's largest deserts. Spanning nearly 650,000 square kilometers -- mainly in Saudi Arabia -- it dominates the Arabian Peninsula, with dunes towering up to 250 meters. Yet, this vast arid expanse was not always so inhospitable. A recent study by an international team led by UNIGE reveals a very different past. ''Our work highlights the presence of an ancient lake, which reached its peak around 8,000 years ago, as well as rivers and a large valley shaped by water,'' explains Abdallah Zaki, first author of the study and a former researcher in the Section of Earth and Environmental Sciences at the UNIGE Faculty of Science and at the California Institute of Technology, currently a distinguished postdoctoral fellow at the Jackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas. A 42 metre deep lake These water sites emerged during the ''Green Arabia'' period, a time of heavy rainfall that lasted from approximately 11,000 to 5,500 years ago, at the end of the Quaternary era. ''The lake is estimated to have been vast, covering an area of 1,100 m² -- almost twice the surface area of Lake Geneva -- and reaching a depth of 42 meters. As rainfall increased, the lake eventually overflowed, causing a major flood that carved a 150 km-long valley into the desert floor,'' explains Sébastien Castelltort, professor of earth surface dynamics in the Section of Earth and Environmental Sciences at the UNIGE Faculty of Science, who led the work with Abdallah Zaki on the UNIGE side. Based on sediments and landform traced over 1000 km, scientists believe that the heavy rains feeding these ancient waterholes came from the northward expansion of the African and Indian monsoons. These wet phases, linked to orbital cycles, varied in duration depending on the region: lasting several millennia in the south compared to only a few centuries in the north. They favored the formation of grasslands and savannahs, which in turn facilitated human expansion across the Arabian Peninsula. Human Impact ''The formation of lake and river landscapes, along with grasslands and savannahs, would have facilitated the expansion of hunting, gathering, and pastoral groups into what is now a dry, barren desert. This is confirmed by abundant archaeological evidence found in the Empty Quarter and along its ancient lake and river systems,"''says Michael Petraglia, professor at Griffith University's Australian Research Centre for Human Evolution. 6,000 years ago, the region experienced a sharp decline in rainfall, creating dry, arid conditions that forced these nomadic populations to migrate to more hospitable environments. These findings underscore the crucial role played by the African monsoon in the rapid transformation of the Arabian Peninsula's desert landscape, as well as in shaping population movements. This narrative of climate perturbations and human migrations, written in rocks and landscapes, is fundamental to understanding and predicting the possible consequences of current climate change.

"Just like a metronome, we used the rhythmic changes in solar insolation imprinted in geological data to synchronize geological climate archives from the South Atlantic and the Northwest Pacific. These key records span the last million years of the Cretaceous and are synchronized down to 5,000 years or less, geologically a blink of an eye 66 million years ago," says lead author Thomas Westerhold from MARUM -- Center for Marine Environmental Sciences at the University of Bremen. To unravel causality arguments in Earth climate history across regions, this kind of synchronization is essential. "So, we had the geological records perfectly lined up in time, and observed that two major changes in climate and biota occurred at the same time in both oceans. But we had to find a way to test if these changes are caused by large scale volcanic eruptions related to the Deccan Traps in India," says Westerhold. The up to two kilometers thick basaltic rocks of the Deccan Traps cover a large part of western India. This large-scale volcanism flooding entire landscapes is referred to as Large Igneous Province by geoscientists. Several times in Earth's history these caused mass extinction events of life on the surface of the planet. Particularly the release of volcanic gases like carbon and sulfur dioxide during the formation of the flood basalts may have played a key role. "The formation of the flood basalts and its subsequent weathering will leave a geochemical fingerprint in the ocean. Therefore, we measured the Osmium isotope composition of the South Atlantic and the Northwest Pacific deposits. They should show the same fingerprint at the same time," says co-author Junichiro Kuroda (University Tokyo, Japan), who conducted the geochemical analyses. "To our surprise we found two steps in the Osmium isotope composition in both oceans contemporaneous with major eruption phases of the Deccan Traps in the latest Cretaceous. And even more surprising those steps had different impacts on the environment as recorded by fossil remains in the drill cores," says Thomas Westerhold. The new data were difficult to understand, but geochemical modeling helped to unravel their secrets. "The volume of the erupted flood basalt must have been much larger than previously though during this early phase of Deccan Trap volcanism. And the related distinct emissions of carbon and sulfur dioxide had diverse effects on the global climate system," says Don Penman (Utah State University, USA) who did the geochemical modeling. According to the new finding, it seems plausible that at the onset of major Deccan Trap volcanism, independently dated 66.288 Million years by radioisotopic methods, an initial pulse with sulfur rich eruptions occurred stressing the ecosystem locally and possibly also globally.

"We're at the tipping point," said electrical and computer engineering professor Daniel Blumenthal. In an invited article that was also selected for the cover of Optica Quantum , Blumenthal, along with graduate student researcher Andrei Isichenko and postdoctoral researcher Nitesh Chauhan, lays out the latest developments and future directions for trapping and cooling the atoms that are fundamental to these experiments -- and that will bring them to devices that fit in the palm of your hand. Cold atoms are atoms that have been cooled to very low temperatures, below 1 mK, reducing their motion to a very low energy regime where quantum effects emerge. This makes them sensitive to some of the faintest electromagnetic signals and fundamental particles, as well as ideal timekeeping, navigation devices and quantum "qubits" for computing. In order to capitalize on these properties, many researchers currently work with highly sensitive laboratory-scale atomic optical systems to confine, trap and cool the atoms. Conventionally, these systems use free-space lasers and optics, generating beams that are guided, directed and manipulated by lenses, mirrors and modulators. These optical systems are combined with magnetic coils and atoms in a vacuum to create cold atoms using the ubiquitous 3-dimensional magneto-optical trap (3D-MOT). The challenge that researchers face is how to replicate the laser and optics functions onto a small, durable device that could be deployed outside of the highly controlled environment of the lab, for applications such as gravitational sensing, precision timekeeping and metrology, and quantum computing The Optica Quantum review article covers recent and rapid advancements in the realm of miniaturizing complex cold-atom experiments via applications of compact optics and integrated photonics. The authors reference photonics achievements across a variety of sub-fields, ranging from telecommunications to sensors, and map the technology development to cold atom science. "There's been a lot of really great work miniaturizing beam delivery," said Isichenko, "but it's been done with components that are still considered free-space optics -- smaller mirrors or smaller gratings -- but you still couldn't integrate multiple functionalities onto a chip." Enter the researchers' photonic integrated 3D-MOT, a miniaturized version of equipment used widely in experiments to deliver beams of light to laser cool the atoms. Embedded into a low-loss silicon nitride waveguide integration platform, it's the part of a photonic system that generates, routes, expands and manipulates all the beams necessary to trap and cool the atoms. The review article highlights the photonic integrated 3D-MOT -- or "PICMOT" demonstrated by the UC Santa Barbara team as a major milestone for the field. "With photonics, we can make lasers on chip, modulators on chip and now large-area grating emitters, which is what we use to get light on and off the chip," Isichenko added. Of particular interest is the atomic cell, a vacuum chamber where the atoms are trapped and cooled. One feat the researchers accomplished was to route the input light from an optical fiber, which is less than the width of a hair, via waveguides to three grating emitters that generate three collimated free-space intersecting beams 3.5 mm wide. Each beam is reflected back on itself for a total of six intersecting beams that trap a million atoms from the vapor inside the cell and, in combination with magnetic fields, cool the atoms to a temperature of just 250 uK. The larger the beams the more atoms can be trapped into a cloud and interrogated, Blumenthal noted, and the more precise an instrument can be. "We created cold atoms with integrated photonics for the first time," said Blumenthal. The implications of the researchers' innovations are far-reaching. With planned improvements to durability and functionality, future chip-scale MOT designs can take advantage of a menu of photonic components, including recent results with chip-scale lasers. This can be used to optimize technology for applications as diverse as measuring volcanic activity to the effects of sea level rise and glacier movement by sensing the gradient of gravity on and around the Earth. Integration of the 3D-MOT can give quantum scientists and time keepers new ways to send today's earthbound instruments into space and conduct new fundamental science, and enable measurements not possible on Earth. Additionally, the devices could advance research projects by decreasing the time and effort spent establishing and fine tuning optical setups. They can also open the door to accessible quantum research projects for future physicists.

By chemically analysing crystals in ancient rocks, the researchers discovered that as glaciers carved through the landscape, they scraped deep into the Earth's crust, releasing key minerals that altered ocean chemistry. This process had a profound impact on our planet's composition, creating conditions that allowed complex life to evolve. Lead author Professor Chris Kirkland from the Timescales of Mineral Systems Group within Curtin's Frontier Institute for Geoscience Solutions said the study provides valuable insights into how Earth's natural systems are deeply interconnected. "When these giant ice sheets melted, they triggered enormous floods that flushed minerals and their chemicals, including uranium, into the oceans," Professor Kirkland said. "This influx of elements changed ocean chemistry, at a time when more complex life was starting to evolve. "This study highlights how Earth's land, oceans, atmosphere and climate are intimately connected- where even ancient glacial activity set off chemical chain reactions that reshaped the planet." Professor Kirkland said the study also offered a new perspective on modern climate change, showing how past shifts in Earth's climate triggered large-scale environmental transformations. "This research is a stark reminder that while Earth itself will endure, the conditions that make it habitable can change dramatically," Professor Kirkland said. "These ancient climate shifts demonstrate that environmental changes, whether natural or human-driven, have profound and lasting impacts. "Understanding these past events can help us better predict how today's climate changes might reshape our world." The research was conducted in collaboration with the University of Portsmouth and St. Francis Xavier University, Canada.

The increased crevassing, especially prominent in fast-flowing portions of the ice sheet, could lead to a feedback loop that accelerates ice loss from the glacier, which ultimately raises sea levels. Greenland's ice melt has added 0.4 inches to sea levels since 1992 and is estimated to add another foot by the end of the century. These findings come from a new study of Greenland between 2016 and 2021 by researchers at the University of Florida, Durham University in the United Kingdom, and other institutions. It is the first ice-sheet-scale analysis of the glacier's crevasses conducted over multiple years, which allowed scientists to see how crevasses changed over relatively short time periods. Analyzing crevasse behavior across the entire Greenland ice sheet required new approaches. "You can't do it in person, because crevasses are dangerous. It's hard to study by hand using satellite data. Automated approaches are needed to determine this at an ice-sheet scale," said Emma MacKie, Ph.D., a professor of geological sciences at the University of Florida, co-author of the study, and expert in machine learning techniques. The team, which also included scientists from Ohio State University and the University of Washington, developed their automated crevasse detection and measurement system based on three-dimensional satellite imagery provided by the Polar Geospatial Center. While general trends show increased crevassing across Greenland on average, the different regions of the glaciers showed different patterns. One sector on the west side of the island actually saw a drop in crevasse volume over the study period. But that regional drop was more than made up for by large increases, up to 25%, in crevasse volume in other areas of the glacier. Since the study's conclusion, the western region has begun opening up more cracks, likely meaning the entire ice sheet will now see more crevassing in the years ahead. "Crevasses can induce accelerated ice flow, leading to more crevassing. So there are these potential positive feedback loops caused by crevassing," MacKie said. "This mechanism should be considered in Greenland ice sheet models that we're using to project future sea level rise." This work was supported in part by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the National Science Foundation.

The study suggests the Zanclean Megaflood ended the Messinian Salinity Crisis, which lasted between 5.97 and 5.33 million years ago. An international team of scientists, including the University of Southampton, have identified a series of geological features around South East Sicily that point to a massive flood taking place across the region. "The Zanclean megaflood was an awe-inspiring natural phenomenon, with discharge rates and flow velocities dwarfing any other known floods in Earth's history," said Dr. Aaron Micallef, lead author of the study and researcher at the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in California. "Our research provides the most compelling evidence yet of this extraordinary event." During the Messinian Salinity Crisis, the Mediterranean Sea became isolated from the Atlantic Ocean and evaporated, leading to vast salt deposits which reshaped the region's landscape. For years, scientists had thought that this dry period ended gradually, with the Mediterranean refilling over a period of 10,000 years. But this idea was challenged by the discovery of an erosion channel stretching from the Gulf of Cadiz to the Alboran Sea in 2009. The finding pointed to a single, massive flooding event, lasting between two and 16 years, which became known as the Zanclean megaflood. Estimates suggest the megaflood had a discharge from 68 to 100 Sverdrups (Sv), with one Sv equal to one million cubic metres per second. The new research published in the journal Communications Earth & Environment combines newly discovered geological features with geophysical data and numerical modelling to provide the most comprehensive picture yet of the megaflood. The researchers investigated over 300 asymmetric, streamlined ridges in a corridor across the Sicily Sill -- a submerged land bridge that once separated the western and eastern Mediterranean basins. "The morphology of these ridges is compatible with erosion by large-scale, turbulent water flow with a predominantly north easterly direction," says Professor Paul Carling, an Emeritus professor in the School of Geography and Environmental Science at the University of Southampton and a coauthor of the study. "They reveal the immense power of the Zanclean Megaflood and how it reshaped the landscape, leaving lasting imprints on the geological record." By sampling the ridges, the team found they were topped with a layer of rocky debris containing material eroded from the ridge flanks and the surrounding region, indicating it was deposited there quickly and with immense force. This layer is right at the boundary between the Messinian and Zanclean periods when the megaflood is believed to have occurred. Using seismic reflection data -- a kind of geological ultrasound allowing scientists to see layers of rock and sediment beneath the surface, the researchers discovered a 'W-shaped channel' on the continental shelf east of the Sicily Sill. This channel, carved into the seabed, connects the ridges to the Noto Canyon -- a deep underwater valley located in the eastern Mediterranean. The shape and location of the channel suggest that it acted like a massive funnel. When the megaflood waters poured over the Sicily Sill, this channel likely carried the water toward the Noto Canyon and into the eastern Mediterranean. The team developed computer models of the megaflood to simulate how the water might have behaved. The model suggests that the flood would have changed direction and grown in intensity as time went on, reaching speeds of up to 32 meters per second (72 miles per hour), carving deeper channels, eroding more material, and transporting it over longer distances. "These findings not only shed light on a critical moment in Earth's geological history but also demonstrate the persistence of landforms over five million years," Dr Micallef added. "It opens the door to further research along the Mediterranean margins." The research was supported by the National Geographic Society, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation.

Port disruptions are costly, very costly. While the 2011 Tohoku tsunami caused around $12 billion in damages to port facilities and vessels, the ensuing port disruptions resulted in a loss in seaborne trade that cost approximately $3.4 billion per day. Shipping facilitates more than 80% of global trade, meaning disruptions to the global port network can have severe consequences for global commerce. Despite these risks, tsunamis are rarely considered in port capital planning or structural design. This oversight is partly due to the infrequent occurrence of tsunamis and the lack of robust methods to quantify potential risks. In response, a group of researchers has proposed a framework to evaluate tsunami risk to seaports and the global port network. The framework estimates potential economic losses in trade caused by port disruptions while also analyzing the ripple effect it would have on the global port network, including the ramifications for shipping routes and ports not directly affected by physical damage. Constance Chua, a postdoctoral researcher at Tohoku University's International Research Institute of Disaster Science (IRIDeS), led the study, with the support of Professor Fumihiko Imamura, Associate Professor Anawat Suppasri, and Professor Adam Switzer from Nanyang Technological University. "We applied our framework to the South China Sea, focusing on a potential tsunami scenario triggered by a rupture along the Manila Trench," says Chua. "We also incorporated tsunami conditions under future sea level rises." In total, Chua and her colleagues evaluated 104 scenarios, thanks to the help of international experts from various fields. These included Dr. Tanghua Li, a geophysicist at the Earth Observatory of Singapore who specializes in sea-level rise modeling in Asia; Research Professor Qiang Qiu, a tectonic geodesy expert on the Manila Trench based at the Chinese Academy of Sciences; and Professor Linlin Li, a tsunami modeling expert from Sun Yat-sen University. Each expert contributed the latest knowledge and models on different hazard components, ensuring a broad base of factors was considered, thereby creating scenarios that mirrored reality as closely as possible. The study found that a Manila Trench tsunami could damage up to 11 international seaports under present-day sea-level conditions and up to 15 ports by 2100. In the most severely damaged locations, port closures could last over 200 days. However, the length of closure did not always translate into the greatest economic loss. Ports with higher annual cargo were more susceptible to economic damage. The ports of Hong Kong, Manila, and Kaohsiung experienced the highest trade losses across all scenarios. Chua says that a Manila Trench tsunami could have greater repercussions for global trade than past events, such as the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami and the costly 2011 Tohoku tsunami. "Since South China hosts some of the busiest ports and sea lanes, the number of disrupted shipping routes would far exceed previous tsunami events. Given the lack of consideration given to tsunami impacts, our study could help stakeholders prepare for such events."

Using sophisticated technology, researchers have now evaluated the June 2021 Melamchi flood's impact with remarkable precision and developed insights that could help predict -- and perhaps prevent -- future catastrophic floods. Led by Josh West, professor of Earth sciences and environmental studies, and PhD student Chan-Mao Chen, both at the USC Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences, the study, published in Nature Geoscience , provides a detailed analysis of the flood's triggers by combining cutting-edge satellite imagery, digital models of the valley's landscape and field data. This approach allowed the researchers to investigate how rainfall, snowmelt and steep terrain worked together to unleash the powerful flood. Perfect storm for flooding and debris flows The study reveals that the Melamchi flood arose from a convergence of factors that set the stage for disaster. "We know that climate change is intensifying the frequency and severity of extreme weather events, and this flood is a textbook example of how multiple forces can come together to create catastrophic flooding," West said. Researchers found that unusually heavy monsoon rainfall combined with excessive snowmelt in the higher reaches of the valley, overwhelming the region's river systems. "The heavy rainfall triggered the snowmelt. This compounded the flooding and ultimately caused landslides," Chen said. Steep topography and unstable slopes in the area worsened the flooding, he added. Digital models of a disastrous flood The team mapped changes in the landscape before and after the flood with unprecedented precision by analyzing high-resolution satellite imagery collected over a decade. They then employed sophisticated software to create highly detailed 3D maps called digital surface models (DSMs) of the area. By analyzing the DSMs, they identified significant patterns of erosion and sediment deposits in the valley -- key indicators of the flood's destructive power. "Traditional methods of monitoring floods rely on gauges and field observations, but these are limited in remote or hard-to-reach areas," said Chen. "With the satellite imagery, we gained a much more complete picture of how the landscape was transformed by the flood." The DSMs allowed the researchers to estimate the scale of erosion and deposition, which is critical for understanding the severity of the flood's impact on the landscape and local infrastructure, West said. In some areas, the landscape had been altered so drastically that entire sections of the riverbed were reshaped. In addition, the team examined boulders in the riverbed to estimate the power of the flood. By measuring the size and movement of these massive rocks, they were able to calculate how much water was needed to move them, providing insights into the flood's transport capacity. "We could tell how much energy the flood had and what it would take to move the debris," Chen explained. Global implications for flood policy and preparedness The study's findings have far-reaching implications for disaster management and policymaking in Nepal and similar regions around the world. "Detailed flood analysis like ours is important for designing early-warning systems," said West. Better understanding of the factors that trigger these kinds of flood events can help authorities predict when and where the next event might occur. The researchers also emphasized the importance of using this data to inform land use and infrastructure planning. Flood-prone areas need to be mapped and understood, not just for current risk, but for how those risks will evolve in the future as the climate continues to change, Chen said. For the public, the study reinforces the need for greater awareness of flood risks in vulnerable regions, especially in mountainous areas and locations where wildfires have scorched the earth and rapid changes in weather can have dramatic effects. As the planet continues to warm and extreme weather events become more frequent, the study provides valuable insights into how scientists can better predict and mitigate the effects of floods and other natural disasters. "Floods like the one in Melamchi Valley could become more common as climate change intensifies," said West. He and Chen hope their study and others like it can reduce the risks involved and save lives in the future.

Previous attempts to quantify changes in rivers over time have only looked at specific outlet reaches or a rear basin part of a river, explains Dongmei Feng, lead author, assistant professor at the University of Cincinnati and former research assistant professor in the Fluvial@UMass lab run by the paper's co-author Colin Gleason, Armstrong Professional Development Professor of civil and environmental engineering at UMass Amherst. "But as we know, rivers are not isolated," she says. "So even if we are interested in one location, we have to think about how it's impacted both upstream and downstream. We think about the river system as a whole, organically connected system. The takeaway from this paper is: The rivers respond to factors -- climate change or human regulation -- differently [and] we provide the finer detail of those responses." River flow rate, also known as discharge, describes how much water flows through a river, measured in cubic meters per second or gallons per day. Currently, flow rate is measured by manually dragging a tool (called an acoustic doppler current profiler) across the surface of a river and then combining it with another automatic measurement of river depth to calculate flow rate over time. Because this approach and only measures flow rate at a specific location, at a specific time, data on flow rates are extremely limited. "There are about 10-15,000 infinitesimally small slices around the world where we know river discharge -- that's it -- out of millions and millions of miles of rivers," says Gleason. So Feng and Gleason developed a new approach using satellite data and computer modeling to capture this flow rate across 3 million stream reaches worldwide. "That's every river, every day, everywhere, over a 35-year period," Gleason says. "Some of these are changing by 5 or 10% per year. That's rapid, rapid change. We had no idea what those flow rates were or how they were changing -- which rivers are not like they used to be -- now we know." The significant decreases found in downstream rivers mean that less fresh water is available on the largest parts of many rivers worldwide. This has significant impacts on drinking water and irrigation. "Communities that use river water for irrigation and drinking water, if that's dropping, then is there a sustainable use?" says Gleason. "Can you grow your town? Can you grow your city? Can you increase your number of [acres] in production? Can the river support it? We don't know exactly why [this is happening], but we do know that's what it might mean." The decrease in flow rate also means that the river has less power to move dirt and small rocks in the river bed. The movement of this sediment downstream builds deltas and is an important process in countering sea rise, so this loss of power is detrimental to deltas, especially in light of modern dam building limiting how much sediment is available to move. Smaller, upstream rivers (typically closer to mountains) are showing an inverse pattern: 17% are seeing an increase in flow. (Though, Gleason points out, this is not uniform, as 10% are decreasing.) This increase in volume in these small rivers can have big impacts on their surrounding communities. The researchers found a 42% increase in large floods of these small streams. Gleason cites those that have occurred in Vermont in recent summers as an example. "Floods are disastrous for humans, but for upstream species, they may be advantageous," adds Feng. Flooding provides important nutrients and a means of travel for migrating fish. "The local people [near the western Amazon River], for example, have reported that the fish migration has increased in that region because the flooding is more frequent, which means the high flow required for fish migration is more frequent." This increase in upstream flow rate may also throw an unexpected wrench in hydropower plans, particularly in High Mountain Asia for places like Nepal and Bhutan. "The increased flow of the river channel means erosion power is much more significant than before and it's transporting more sediment downstream," says Feng. This becomes an issue for countries looking to develop more clean energy because this sediment can clog up hydropower plants. While the paper cannot quantify the exact cause and effect, the researchers know that the general drivers of these changes are largely climate change and human activity. "Upstream river regions have increasing precipitation in general," says Feng. "And the snow melt in the high elevation, which is typically cold, is probably more sensitive to climate change, so the snow melt has been increasing in these regions." Human activity includes sourcing water from rivers for drinking or agriculture or wastewater dumping. And Gleason adds that this paper is an important step: "If you don't know what it is, you can't figure out why it is. People who live along these rivers, of course, know there are problems, but if you're a policy analyst and you're trying to determine the best location for a new hydropower plant out of 100 candidates, it's hard to measure 100 different rivers accurately. [Colleagues in water systems say] you would be shocked at how many places, particularly those that are resource-limited, make major decisions about climate futures, water resources, and infrastructure projects with almost no data on hand. My hope is that everyone can use these data, understand them, and maybe make a more informed decision."

The study, published today [5 December 2024] in Papers in Palaeontology , has discovered a whole community of predators belonging to different dinosaur groups -- including tyrannosaurs, spinosaurs and members of the Velociraptor family. It's the first time tyrannosaurs have been identified in sediments of this age and region. "Meat-eating dinosaurs -- properly called theropods -- are rare in the Cretaceous sediments of southern England," said Dr Chris Barker, visiting researcher at the University of Southampton and lead author of the research. "Usually, Isle of Wight dinosaurs attract most of our attention. Much less is known about the older Cretaceous specimens recovered from sites on the mainland." Dinosaur teeth The new Bexhill-on-Sea dinosaurs are represented by teeth alone. Theropod teeth are complex, and vary in size, shape, and in the anatomy of their serrated edges. The University of Southampton team used several techniques to analyse the fossils, including phylogenetic, discriminant and machine learning methods, teaming up with colleagues at London's Natural History Museum, the Hastings Museum and Art Gallery, and the Museo Miguel Lillo De Ciencias Naturales in Argentina. "Dinosaur teeth are tough fossils and are usually preserved more frequently than bone. For that reason, they're often crucial when we want to reconstruct the diversity of an ecosystem," says Dr Barker. "Rigorous methods exist that can help identify teeth with high accuracy. Our results suggest the presence of spinosaurs, mid-sized tyrannosaurs and tiny dromaeosaurs -- Velociraptor -like theropods -- in these deposits." The discovery of tyrannosaurs is particularly notable, since the group hasn't previously been identified in sediments of this age and region. These tyrannosaurs would have been around a third of the size of their famous cousin Tyrannosaurus rex , and likely hunted small dinosaurs and other reptiles in their floodplain habitat. "Assigning isolated teeth to theropod groups can be challenging, especially as many features evolve independently amongst different lineages. This is why we employed various methods to help refine our findings, leading to more confident classifications," says Lucy Handford, co-author of the paper and former University of Southampton Master's student, who is now undertaking a PhD at the University of York. "It's highly likely that reassessment of theropod teeth in museum stores elsewhere will bring up additional discoveries." Discovery at Ashdown Brickworks The tireless collecting of retired quarryman Dave Brockhurst, who has spent the last 30 years uncovering fossils from Ashdown Brickworks, was key to the discovery. Dave has uncovered thousands of specimens, ranging from partial dinosaur skeletons to tiny shark teeth. Around 5000 of his discoveries have already been donated to Bexhill Museum. Theropods are exceptionally rare at the site, and Dave has only found ten or so specimens there so far. "As a child I was fascinated by dinosaurs and never thought how close they could be," says Mr Brockhurst. "Many years later I started work at Ashdown and began looking for fossils. I'm happy with tiny fish scales or huge thigh bones, although the preservation of the dinosaur teeth really stands out for me." Exciting find Dr Darren Naish, a co-author of the study, added: "Southern England has an exceptionally good record of Cretaceous dinosaurs, and various sediment layers here are globally unique in terms of geological age and the fossils they contain. "These East Sussex dinosaurs are older than those from the better-known Cretaceous sediments of the Isle of Wight, and are mysterious and poorly known by comparison. We've hoped for decades to find out which theropod groups lived here, so the conclusions of our new study are really exciting." Dr Neil Gostling, also from the University of Southampton, supervised the project. He said: "This project shows that museum collections, curators, and collectors are vital for pushing forward our understanding of the diversity of dinosaurs, and other extinct groups. We're also very thankful to Ashdown Brickworks for their cooperation in preserving the quarry's important palaeontological heritage. "200 years after the naming of the first dinosaur, Megalosaurus , there are still really big discoveries to be made. Dinosaur palaeobiology is alive and well." Several of the specimens are on display at Bexhill Museum in East Sussex. The research was funded by the University of Southampton's Institute for Life Sciences.

In a new article published in Communications Earth & Environment today, researchers from the University of Aberdeen, University of Birmingham and Manchester Metropolitan University analysed velocity data from 85% of the world’s approximately 217,000 glaciers. After controlling for factors such as climate, ice thickness and surface slope, the team found that glaciers near active volcanoes typically flowed 46% faster than other glaciers. Glaciers looked at in the study include those associated with some of the most iconic and infamous volcanoes in the world, such as Mt Rainier and Glacier Peak in Washington, Mt Redoubt and Mt Veniaminof in Alaska, and Eyjafjallajokull in Iceland, which erupted over a period of three months in 2010 and led to air disruption that was estimated to have affected 10 million passengers. Analysis of these and other glaciers suggests that high geothermal heat from nearby volcanic activity likely transfers into the base of glaciers and increases melting of the ice. The enhanced melt reduces friction between the glacier and the underlying rock, resulting in faster glacier flow. The findings could enable volcanologists to develop a new early warning system for potential eruptions at sites such as Eyjafjallajokull by tracking changes in glacier velocities that could reveal increases in volcanic activity several months ahead of an eruption. Dr Joseph Mallalieu from the School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences at the University of Birmingham and corresponding author of the study said: “Our research has notable implications for the mitigation of volcanic hazards. Ice-covered volcanoes are amongst the most dangerous globally because glacial meltwater released during eruptions can trigger outburst floods and debris flows capable of rapidly submerging nearby settlements. “Ice cover also limits the use of established techniques for monitoring volcanic activity. Recent studies have shown that the size, shape and elevation of glaciers can respond to volcanic activity, but the relationship between volcanism and glacier flow remained unknown. Our results suggest that satellite observations of glacier velocity could be a valuable new technique for monitoring volcanic activity and predicting eruptions.” Professor Matteo Spagnolo from the School of Geosciences at the University of Aberdeen and co-author of the study said: “If glacier velocity can be used as a precursor months before an eruption, it will help focus additional monitoring efforts on volcanoes likely to erupt, which in turn will alert decision makers. “It could provide much needed forewarning to local authorities to plan the possible evacuation of a nearby city, or impose a no-fly zone, without relying on last minute decisions. It will also help preparing the local population for what might come well in advance.” Dr Iestyn Barr, Reader in Glaciovolcanology at Manchester Metropolitan University and co-author of the study said: “The potential for glacier monitoring to help predict volcanic eruptions is an exciting and important finding from this study. Over coming years, we hope to investigate and exploit this potential for glacier covered volcanoes globally."

The site, which has been studied for the past 14 years by a team of Laotian, French, American and Australian scientists, has produced some of the earliest fossil evidence of our direct ancestors in Southeast Asia. Now a new study, led by PhD candidate Vito Hernandez and Associate Professor Mike Morley from the College of Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, has reconstructed the ground conditions in the cave between 52,000 and 10,000 years ago. "Using a technique known as microstratigraphy at the Flinders Microarchaeology Laboratory, we were able to reconstruct the cave conditions in the past and identify traces of human activities in and around Tam Pà Ling," says Hernandez. "This also helped us to determine the precise circumstances by which some of the earliest modern human fossils found in Southeast Asia were deposited deep inside." Microstratigraphy allows scientists to study dirt in its smallest detail, enabling them to observe structures and features that preserve information about past environments and even traces of human and animal activity that may have been overlooked during the excavation process due to their minuscule size. The human fossils discovered at Tam Pà Ling were deposited in the cave between 86,000-30,000 years ago but until now, researchers had not conducted a detailed analysis of the sediments surrounding these fossils to gain an understanding of how they were deposited in the cave or the environmental conditions at the time. Published in Quaternary Science Reviews , the findings reveal conditions in the cave fluctuated dramatically, going from a temperate climate with frequent wet ground conditions to becoming seasonally dry. "This change in environment influenced the cave's interior topography and would have impacted how sediments, including human fossils, were deposited within the cave," says Associate Professor Morley. "How early Homo sapiens came to be buried deep within the cave has long been debated, but our sediment analysis indicates that the fossils were washed into the cave as loose sediments and debris accumulating over time, likely carried by water from surrounding hillsides during periods of heavy rainfall." The team also identified preserved micro-traces of charcoal and ash in the cave sediments, suggesting that either forest fires occurred in the region during the drier periods, or that humans visiting the cave may have used fire, either in the cave or near the entrance. "This research has allowed our team to develop unprecedented insights into the dynamics of our ancestors as they dispersed through the ever-changing forest covers of Southeast Asia, and during periods of variable regional climate instability," says study co-author Assistant Professor Fabrice Demeter, palaeoanthropologist from the University of Copenhagen, who has been leading the team of international researchers studying Tam Pàn Ling since 2009.

Researchers from The University of Texas at Austin in collaboration with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland (GEUS) have found a new mechanism that explains the process of how impermeable horizontal ice layers are formed below the surface, a process critical for determining the contribution of ice sheet meltwater to sea level rise. The work by Mohammad Afzal Shadab a graduate student at UT's Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences was published in Geophysical Research Letters . Shadab was supervised by study co-authors Marc Hesse and Cyril Grima at UT's Jackson School of Geosciences. The world's two largest freshwater reservoirs, the Greenland and Antarctica ice sheets, are covered in old snow, known as firn, that's not yet compacted into solid ice. Because the firn is porous, melted snow can drain down into the firn and freeze again rather than running into the sea. This process is thought to decrease meltwater runoff by about half. However, it's also possible to form impermeable ice layers that can serve as barriers for meltwater -- and divert meltwater to the sea, said Shadab. "So, there are cases where these ice layers in firn accelerate the rate of meltwater running into the oceans," he said. The potential for glacial meltwater to freeze in firns or flow off existing ice barriers makes understanding freezing dynamics within the firn layer an important part of estimating sea level rise, according to the researchers. Previous work on firn in mountains, which also contains ice layers, found that these ice layers are created when rainwater accumulates, or ponds, on older layers within the firn and then refreezes. But according to Hesse, it didn't seem to work that way for ice sheets. "When we looked at the data from Greenland, the actual amount of melt that's being produced, even in an extreme melt event, is not enough to produce ponds," said Hesse. "And that's really where this study has come up with a new mechanism for ice layer formation." This new research presents ice layer formation as a competition between two processes: warmer meltwater flowing down through the porous firn (advection) and the cold ice freezing the water in place by heat conduction. The depth where heat conduction begins to dominate over heat advection determines the location where a new ice layer forms. "Now that we know the physics of the formation of those ice layers, we will be able to better predict the meltwater retention capability of firn," said study co-author Surendra Adhikari, a geophysicist at JPL. Anja Rutishauser, a former UT postdoctoral researcher who is now a now at GEUS, also co-authored the study. To ground truth this new mechanism, the researchers compared their models to a dataset collected in 2016 in which scientists dug a hole in Greenland's firn and heavily equipped it with thermometers and radar that could measure the movement of meltwater. While previous hydrological models deviated from the measurements, the new mechanism successfully mirrored observations. An unexpected finding of the new work was that the location of the ice layers may act as a record of the thermal conditions under which they formed. "In the warming scenario, we found that the ice layers form deeper and deeper into the firn chronologically in a top-down fashion," said Shadab. "And in a colder condition, ice layers form closer to the surface in a bottom-up scenario." Today, the amount of water running into the sea from Greenland currently outpaces Antarctica's, about 270 billion tons per year compared to Antarctica's 140 billion tons. Together, that's more than two and a half Lake Tahoe's worth each year. But future predictions of how much the two ice sheets will contribute to sea level rise are highly variable, fluctuating from 5 to 55 centimeters by 2100. And it's clear ice layers play a key, and until now, poorly understood role. "Things are much more complex in reality than what has been captured by existing models," said Adhikari. "If we really want to improve our predictions, this is where we're really advancing the state of the art."

The most recent great earthquake was in 1700. But it probably won't be the last. And the area that stands to be affected is now bustling metropolises that are home to millions of people. Figuring out the frequency of earthquakes -- and when the next "big one" will happen -- is an active scientific question that involves looking for signs of past earthquakes in the geologic record in the form of shaken up rocks, sediment and landscapes. However, a study by scientists at The University of Texas at Austin and collaborators is calling into question the reliability of an earthquake record that covers thousands of years -- a type of geologic deposit called a turbidite that's found in the strata of the seafloor. The researchers analyzed a selection of turbidite layers from the Cascadia subduction zone dating back about 12,000 years ago with an algorithm that assessed how well turbidite layers correlated with one another. They found that, in most cases, the correlation between the turbidite samples was no better than random. Since turbidites can be caused by a range of phenomena, and not just earthquakes, the results suggest that the turbidite record's connection to past earthquakes is more uncertain than previously thought. "We would like everyone citing the intervals of Cascadia subduction earthquakes to understand that these timelines are being questioned by this study," said Joan Gomberg, a research geophysicist at the U.S. Geological Survey and study co-author. "It's important to conduct further research to refine these intervals. What we do know is that Cascadia was seismically active in the past and will be in the future, so ultimately, people need to be prepared." The results don't necessarily change the estimated earthquake frequency in Cascadia, which is about every 500 years, said the researchers. The current frequency estimate is based on a range of data and interpretations, not just the turbidites analyzed in this study. However, the results do highlight the need for more research on turbidite layers, specifically, and how they relate to each other and large earthquakes. Co-author Jacob Covault, a research professor at the UT Jackson School of Geosciences, said the algorithm offers a quantitative tool that that provides a replicable method for interpreting ancient earthquake record, which are usually based on more qualitative descriptions of the geology and their potential associations. "This tool provides a repeatable result, so everybody can see the same thing," said Covault, the co-principal investigator of the Quantitative Clastics lab at the Jackson School's Bureau of Economic Geology. "You can potentially argue with that result, but at least you have a baseline, an approach that is reproducible." The results were published in the journal GSA Bulletin . The study includes researchers from the USGS, Stanford University and the Alaska Division of Geological & Geophysical Surveys. Turbidites are the remnants of underwater landslides. They're made of sediments that settled back down to the seafloor after being flung into the water by the turbulent motion of sediment rushing across the ocean floor. The sediment in these layers have a distinctive gradation, with coarser grains at the bottom and finer ones at the top. But there's more than one way to make a turbidite layer. Earthquakes can cause landslides when they shake up the seafloor. But so can storms, floods and a range of other natural phenomena, albeit on a geographic smaller scale. Currently, connecting turbidites to past earthquakes usually involves finding them in geologic cores taken from the seafloor. If a turbidite shows up in roughly the same spot in multiple samples across a relatively large area, it's counted as a remnant of a past earthquake, according to the researchers. Although carbon dating samples can help narrow down timing, there's still a lot of uncertainty in interpreting if samples that appear at about the same time and place are connected by the same event. Getting a better handle on how different turbidite samples relate to one another inspired the researchers to apply a more quantitative method -- an algorithm called "dynamic time warping" -- to the turbidite data. The algorithmic method dates back to the 1970s and has a wide range of applications, from voice recognition to smoothing out graphics in dynamic VR environments. This is the first time it has been applied to analyzing turbidites, said co-author Zoltán Sylvester, a research professor at the Jackson School and co-principal investigator of the Quantitative Clastics Lab, who led the adaption of the algorithm for analyzing turbidites. "This algorithm has been a key component of a lot of the projects I have worked on," said Sylvester. "But it's still very much underused in the geosciences." The algorithm detects similarity between two samples that may vary over time, and determines how closely the data between them matches. For voice recognition software, that means recognizing key words even though they might be spoken at different speeds or pitches. For the turbidites, it involves recognizing shared magnetic properties between different turbidite samples that may look different from location to location despite originating from the same event. "Correlating turbidites is no simple task," said co-author Nora Nieminski, the coastal hazards program manager for the Alaska Division of Geological & Geophysical Surveys. "Turbidites commonly demonstrate significant lateral variability that reflect their variable flow dynamics. Therefore, it is not expected for turbidites to preserve the same depositional character over great distances, or even small distances in many cases, particularly along active margins like Cascadia or across various depositional environments." The researchers also subjected the correlations produced by the algorithm to another level of scrutiny. They compared the results to correlation data calculated using synthetic data made by comparing 10,000 pairs of random turbidite layers. This synthetic comparison served as a control against coincidental matches in the actual samples. The researchers applied their technique to magnetic susceptibility logs for turbidite layers in nine geologic cores that were collected during a scientific cruise in 1999. They found that in most cases, the connection between turbidite layers that had been previously correlated was no better than random. The only exception to this trend was for turbidite layers that were relatively close together -- no more than about 15 miles apart. The researchers emphasize that the algorithm is just one way of analyzing turbidities, and that the inclusion of other data could change the degree of correlation between the cores one way or another. But according to these results, the presence of turbidities at the same time and general area in the geologic record is not enough to definitively connect them to one another. And although algorithms and machine learning approaches can help with that task, it's up to geoscientists to interpret the results and see where the research leads. "We are here for answering questions not just applying the tool," Sylvester said. "But at the same time, if you are doing this kind of work, then it forces you to think very carefully."

Seawalls and similar infrastructure are obvious options to protect against flooding. In fact, cities such as New York and San Franciso have already thrashed out potential plans with the Army Corps of Engineers that will heavily rely on seawalls. But these plans come with a hefty price tag, estimated at tens of billions of dollars. Further complicating planning, a new paper has found that seawalls and other shoreline barriers, which extend below the surface, might actually lead to more groundwater flooding, result in less protection against saltwater intrusion into groundwater, and end up with a lot of water to deal with inside of the area that seawalls were supposed to protect. The paper, "Shoreline barriers may amplify coast groundwater hazards with sea-level rise," was published in Scientific Reports, which is part of the Nature portfolio. The paper was written by Xin Su, a research assistant professor at the University of Memphis; Kevin Befus, an assistant professor at the U of A; and Michelle Hummel, an assistant professor at the University of Texas at Arlington. Su was previously a post-doctoral researcher working with Befus in the U of A's Geosciences Department before assuming her current position. The paper provides an overview of how sea-level rise causes salty groundwater to move inland and replace the fresh groundwater that was there, a process known as saltwater intrusion. At the same time, the fresh and salty groundwater both rise toward the ground surface because of the higher sea level. This can cause flooding from below, also known as groundwater emergence. Walls can be built underground to reduce saltwater intrusion, but this can lead to groundwater getting stuck behind the walls, which act like an underground dam. This can cause even more groundwater to move up to the ground surface, which can in turn infiltrate sewer systems and water mains. "These barriers can backfire if they don't take into account the potential for inland flooding caused by rising groundwater levels," Su explained. "Excessive groundwater could potentially reduce sewer capacity, increase the risk of corrosion and contaminate the drinking water supply by weakening the pipes." The researchers noted that studies prior to this one did not include the groundwater flooding effects, which led those studies to anticipate more benefits from underground walls than this latest paper now suggests. "The standard plan for protecting against flooding is to build seawalls," Befus added. "Our simulations show that just building seawalls will lead to water seeping in under the wall from the ocean as well as filling up from the landward side. Ultimately, this means if we want to build seawalls, we need to be ready to pump a lot of water for as long as we want to keep that area dry -- this is what the Dutch have had to do for centuries with first windmills and now large pumps." Su concluded: "We found that building these protection barriers without accounting for potential inland flooding risks from groundwater can eventually worsen the very issues they aim to solve." She added that "these risks highlight the need for careful planning when building barriers, especially in densely populated coastal communities. By addressing these potential issues, coastal communities can be better protected from rising sea levels." When building flood-related or underground walls, there appears to be no perfect solution that prevents saltwater intrusion or groundwater flooding. As such, the researchers recommend that any underground barriers have additional plans to deal with the extra water that would pond up inland of the barrier, such as using pumps or French drains, which utilize perforated pipes embedded in gravel or loose rock that direct water away from foundations. City planners in New York, San Francisco and coastal cities globally would do well to take heed of this as they develop plans to combat rising sea levels.

Scientists have documented many river-course changes, called avulsions, including some in response to earthquakes. However, "I don't think we have ever seen such a big one anywhere," said study coauthor Michael Steckler, a geophysicist at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, which is part of the Columbia Climate School. It could have easily inundated anyone and anything in the wrong place at the wrong time, he said. Lead author Liz Chamberlain, an assistant professor at the Netherlands' Wageningen University, said, "It was not previously confirmed that earthquakes could drive avulsion in deltas, especially for an immense river like the Ganges." The Ganges rises in the Himalayas and flows for some 1,600 miles, eventually combining with other major rivers including the Brahmaputra and the Meghna to form a labyrinth of waterways that empty into a wide stretch of the Bay of Bengal spanning Bangladesh and India. Together, they form the world's second-largest river system as measured by discharge. (The Amazon is first.) Like other rivers that run through major deltas, the Ganges periodically undergoes minor or major course changes without any help from earthquakes. Sediments washed from upstream settle and build up in the channel, until eventually the river bed grows subtly higher than the surrounding flood plain. At some point, the water breaks through and begins constructing a new path for itself. But this does not generally happen all at once -- it may take successive floods over years or decades. An earthquake-related avulsion, on the other hand, can occur more or less instantaneously, said Steckler. In satellite imagery, the authors of the new study spotted what they say was probably the former main channel of the river, some 100 kilometers south of the Bangladeshi capital of Dhaka. This is a low-lying area about 1.5 kilometers wide that can be found intermittently for some 100 kilometers more or less parallel to the current river course. Filled with mud, it frequently floods, and is used mainly for rice cultivation. Chamberlain and other researchers were exploring this area in 2018 when they came across a freshly dug excavation for a pond that had not yet been filled with water. On one flank, they spotted distinct vertical dikes of light-colored sand cutting up through horizontal layers of mud. This is a well-known feature created by earthquakes: In such watery areas, sustained shaking can pressurize buried layers of sand and inject them upward through overlying mud. The result: literal sand volcanoes, which can erupt at the surface. Called seismites, here, they were 30 or 40 centimeters wide, cutting up through 3 or 4 meters of mud. Further investigation showed the seismites were oriented in a systematic pattern, suggesting they were all created at the same time. Chemical analyses of sand grains and particles of mud showed that the eruptions and the abandonment and infilling of the channel both took place about 2,500 years ago. Furthermore, there was a similar site some 85 kilometers downstream in the old channel that had filled in with mud at the same time. The authors' conclusion: This was a big, sudden avulsion triggered by an earthquake, estimated to be magnitude 7 or 8. The quake could have had one of two possible sources, they say. One is a subduction zone to the south and east, where a huge plate of oceanic crust is shoving itself under Bangladesh, Myanmar and northeastern India. Or it could have come from giant splay faults at the foot of the Himalayas to the north, which are slowly rising because the Indian subcontinent is slowly colliding with the rest of Asia. A 2016 study led by Steckler shows that these zones are now building stress, and could produce earthquakes comparable to the one 2,500 years ago. The last one of this size occurred in 1762, producing a deadly tsunami that traveled up the river to Dhaka. Another may have occurred around 1140 CE. The 2016 study estimates that a modern recurrence of such a quake could affect 140 million people. "Large earthquakes impact large areas and can have long-lasting economic, social and political effects," said Syed Humayun Akhter, vice-chancellor of Bangladesh Open University and a coauthor on both studies. The Ganges is not the only river facing such hazards. Others cradled in tectonically active deltas include China's Yellow River; Myanmar's Irrawaddy; the Klamath, San Joaquin and Santa Clara rivers, which flow off the U.S. West Coast; and the Jordan, spanning the borders of Syria, Jordan, the Palestinian West Bank and Israel. Other coauthors of the new study are at the University of Cologne, Germany; the University of Dhaka; Bangladesh University of Professionals; Noakhali Science and Technology University, Bangladesh; and the University of Salzburg, Austria. The research was funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation.

The study, published in Communications Earth & Environment , predicts that Southern California's coastal living costs will surge fivefold by 2050 as a direct result of beach erosion. This erosion will require more frequent and costly beach nourishment projects to maintain the state's treasured shorelines, consequently driving up the cost of living along the coast. "Our study presents compelling evidence of the rapid deterioration of Southern California's coastal landscapes," said Essam Heggy, a geoscientist in the Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering/Electrophysics at the USC Viterbi School of Engineering and the study's corresponding author. "The challenges facing Southern California mirror a growing threat shared by coastal communities worldwide. The environmental and economic implications of coastal erosion reach far beyond California's shores and demand interdisciplinary, global solutions," he said. Coastal erosion: Cost of living sure to surge as sandy beaches disappear To predict future changes along California's sandy coastlines, the researchers focused on the Gulf of Santa Catalina, which stretches over 150 miles from the Palos Verdes Peninsula in Los Angeles County to the northern tip of Baja California in Mexico. They used a combination of historical and recent satellite images as well as advanced algorithms to analyze coastline movement and predict future erosion based on different trends and environmental factors. The study predicts a tripling of erosion rates by 2050, increasing from an average of 1.45 meters per year to 3.18 meters by 2100. Consequently, the annual sand requirement for beach nourishment could triple by 2050, with costs rising fivefold due to the global increase in sand prices. This will exacerbate economic and logistical pressures on coastal communities. Beach nourishment is adding sand to an eroded beach to rebuild it and create a wider barrier against waves and storms. "Our investigation suggests that coastal problems start inland due to the rapid growth of cities along the coast, which compromise inland sediment replenishment of sandy beaches," said Heggy, whose research focuses on understanding water evolution in Earth's arid environments. "As our beaches shrink, the cost of maintaining them will rise. Finding innovative solutions is key to securing a sustainable future for our shores and local economies," he said. Coastal erosion in California: A case study for a global problem Coastal cities in Southern California and those in North Africa bordering the Mediterranean Sea face a common challenge: a semi-arid climate year-round coupled with the growing threats of rising sea levels and eroding shorelines. A significant portion of Earth's landmass, roughly 41%, falls under arid or semi-arid classifications, and these areas support over a third of the global population. To understand this global challenge, the researchers focused on two specific locations: Corona del Mar in Orange County, Calif. -- an example of the typical Southern California coastline -- and Hammamet North Beach in Tunisia. Both are densely populated and share similar climates, prone to increasing droughts, flash floods and unpredictable rainfall patterns. These characteristics mirror the challenges faced by countless coastal communities worldwide. The findings showed that the average rate of shoreline retreat in these areas varies. In Southern California, beaches are receding between 0.75 and 1.24 meters per year. In Hammamet North Beach, the retreat rate ranges from 0.21 to about 4.49 meters annually. "While beach nourishment can temporarily combat erosion, however, it presents significant challenges for developing countries," said Oula Amrouni, a sedimentologist at the National Institute of Marine Sciences and Technologies at the University of Carthage, Tunis, Tunisia, and one of the study's co-authors. "The high cost of acquiring the right sand, with the specific grain size, quality and composition, and the technical complexity of extracting and laying it are major hurdles. Additionally, worsening erosion in previously stable areas compels more frequent nourishment projects, straining already limited budgets and leading to unplanned expenditures for many communities." About the study Co-authors of the study include Oula Amrouni and Abderraouf Hzami of the National Institute of Marine Sciences and Technologies at the University of Carthage, Tunis, Tunisia. This research is supported by the Arid Climates and Water Research Center at USC under contract from the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (AWD#00630), the USC Zumberge Research and Innovation Fund, and the USC Sea Grant.

Researchers have explored how the River Nile evolved over the past 11,500 years and how changes in its geography could have helped shape the fortunes of ancient Egyptian civilisation. Research published in Nature Geoscience reveals a major shift in the Nile around four thousand years ago, after which the floodplain in the Nile Valley around Luxor greatly expanded. The findings raise the possibility that this shift could have contributed to the success of the ancient Egyptian agricultural economy at points between the Old and New Kingdom periods. The New Kingdom was a period of unparalleled prosperity, military conquest, and cultural achievement in Ancient Egyptian history. Dr Benjamin Pennington, a co-author on the paper from the University of Southampton said: "The expansion of the floodplain will have greatly enlarged the area of arable land in the Nile Valley near Luxor (ancient Thebes) and improved the fertility of the soil by regularly depositing fertile silts." "While no specific causal links can be inferred between this shift and any contemporaneous social developments, the changes in the landscape are nonetheless an important factor that need to be considered when discussing the trajectory of Ancient Egyptian culture." The study also suggests that changes in the Nile's behaviour and landscape might have influenced settlement patterns and the location of iconic historical structures, such as Karnak temple. The research was carried out by an international team led by Dr Angus Graham of Uppsala University in Sweden and including several archaeologists and geographers from the University of Southampton. Dominic Barker, another co-author also from the University of Southampton, explained how the work was achieved: "We drilled 81 boreholes, many by hand, across the whole Nile Valley near Luxor -- a genuine first for Egypt. Using geological information contained within the cores, and dating the sediments using a technique called Optically Stimulated Luminescence we were able to piece together the evolution of the riverine landscape." The team found that between around 11,500 and four thousand years ago, the Nile experienced significant valley incision, meaning the river cut down into its bed, creating deep channels and a narrower flood plain. This may have led to more pronounced and forceful flooding. These flood dynamics would have been in place between the Epipalaeolithic period (a time of hunter-gatherer societies) and the Old Kingdom (the 'age of the pyramids') and perhaps the Middle Kingdom of ancient Egypt. "The Egyptian Nile we see today looks very different from how it would have been throughout much of the last 11,500 years," says Dr Pennington. "For most of this time, the Nile was made up of a network of interwoven channels that frequently changed their course." Around 4,000 years ago, the Nile abruptly shifted and there was rapid floodplain aggradation, where the river began depositing large amounts of sediment, building up the valley floor. This created a more expansive and stable floodplain. The river also progressively changed character during this time -- from a dynamic wandering-braided system to fewer, more stable channels. The single-channel Nile we are familiar with today didn't really establish itself until around two thousand years ago. The researchers say the major shift in the Nile's behaviour was likely caused by a reduction in the volume of water flowing through the river and an increase in fine sediment supply. This was driven by the aridification of the Nile basin, with the 'Green Sahara' of the African Humid Period transforming into the present-day hyper-arid Sahara Desert. This shift in regional climate may have further combined with changing human impacts on the land to make the soil more prone to erosion. The new insights into the evolution of the Egyptian Nile Valley near Luxor provide essential landscape context for archaeologists and Egyptologists to reinterpret ancient sites in the region and re-consider locations of settlements in the Nile Valley.

With their easily visualized "jigsaw-puzzle fit," it has long been known that the western coast of Africa and the eastern coast of South America once nestled together in the supercontinent Gondwana -- which broke off from the larger landmass of Pangea. The research team says the southern coast of Angola, where they dug up the samples, arguably provides the most complete geological record ever recorded on land of the two continents moving apart and the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean. Rocks and fossils found date back from 130 million years ago to 71 million years. "There are places that you can go to in South America, for instance, where you can see this part of the split or that part of it, but in Angola, it's all laid out in one place," said Louis L. Jacobs, SMU professor emeritus of Earth Sciences and president of ISEM. Jacobs is the lead author of a study published in The Geological Society, London, Special Publications . "Before this, there was not a place known to go and see the rocks on the surface that really reflected the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean, because they're now in the ocean or eroded away," Jacobs said. Angola rocks and fossils tell the whole story Africa and South America started to split around 140 million years ago, causing gashes in Earth's crust called rifts to open up along pre-existing weaknesses. As the tectonic plates beneath South America and Africa moved apart, magma from the Earth's mantle rose to the surface, creating a new oceanic crust and pushing the continents away from each other. And eventually, the South Atlantic Ocean filled the void between these two newly-formed continents. Scientists have previously found evidence of these events through geophysics and well cores drilled through the ocean floor. But these tell-tale signs have never been found in one place, or been so clearly visible for anyone to see, said study co-author Michael J. Polcyn, research associate in the Huffington Department of Earth Sciences and senior research fellow, ISEM at SMU. "It's one thing for a geophysicist to be able to look at seismic data and make inferences from that," he said. "It's quite another thing to be able to take a school field trip out to the rock formations, or outcrops, and say this is when the lava was spreading from eastern South America. Or this was when it was a continuous land." Essentially, Angola presents the opportunity for someone to easily walk through each phase of this geologically significant chapter in Earth's history. "That gives Angola major bragging rights," Jacobs said. Jacobs, Polcyn and Diana P. Vineyard -- who is a research associate at SMU -- worked with an international team of paleontologists, geologists and others to analyze both the rock formations they found in eight different locations on the coast and the fossils within them. Fieldwork in Angola's Namibe Province began in 2005. At that time, the research team recognized particular types of sediments, which gave them a good indication of what the western coast of Africa had been like at various stages millions of years ago. For instance, fields of lava revealed volcanic outpourings, and faults or breaks showed where the continents were being rifted apart. Sediments and salt deposits showed ocean flooding and evaporation, while overlying oceanic sediments and marine reptiles showed completion of the South Atlantic Ocean. Paleontologists, meanwhile, discovered fossils in Angola from large marine reptiles that had lived late during the Cretaceous Period, right after the Atlantic Ocean was completed and while it grew wider. By bringing together experts from a wide range of fields, "we were able to document when there was no ocean at all, to when there was a fresh enough ocean for those reptiles to thrive and have enough to eat," Vineyard said. Many of the ancient fossils are currently on display at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History "Sea Monsters Unearthed: Life in Angola's Ancient Seas" exhibit, which was co-produced with SMU -- a nationally-ranked Dallas-based private university. Angolan researchers -- Nair de Sousa, a geoscientist and energy consultant at the African Circular Business Alliance, and Pedro Claude Nsungani, a geology professor at the Universidade Agostinho Neto -- also played a key role in this research.

A new paper out of UC Santa Barbara presents an account of what drives the migration rates of meandering rivers. The two authors compiled a global dataset of these waterways, analyzing how vegetation and sediment load effect channel movement. "We find a global-scale trend between the amount of sediment that rivers carry and how quickly they're migrating, across all variables," said lead author Evan Greenberg, a doctoral student in the Department of Geography. Their results, published in the journal Earth and Planetary Science Letters, contrast with previous work that emphasized the stabilizing effect of vegetation. In this paper, the researchers highlight how the activity of meandering rivers emerges from the interplay between sediment deposition and bank stabilization by vegetation. Some of the world's most important waterways are meandering rivers, so properly understanding their behavior is crucial to managing these natural phenomena in a changing world. Two forces, called bar push and bank pull, act on a river bend. Bar push is caused when deposition on the inside of a bend forms a sandbar, which pushes the curve outward. At the same time, erosion on the opposite bank pulls the bend even farther outward. Sediment load has a stronger effect on the former, while the stabilizing presence of vegetation has more influence on the latter. Scientists have proposed various hypotheses as to which factor exerts a stronger influence on meander migration. "This is a pretty contentious topic and keeps going back and forth," said senior author Vamsi Ganti, Greenberg's advisor and an associate professor in the geography department. To investigate these dynamics, Greenberg and Ganti collated existing measurements of river migration rates and added data from approximately 60 additional rivers. Altogether, they compiled data on 139 meandering rivers across the globe, spanning different regions, climates, sizes and vegetation regimes. The researchers modeled each river channel as a series of line segments using satellite imagery. They could then track how these segments shifted over time to measure the river's migration. The leading paradigm was that vegetation slows down this migration by stabilizing the outer bank against erosion. This contrasted with experimental evidence suggesting that sediment load could be an influential factor. Bank pull is stronger in unvegetated rivers, but as Greenberg and Ganti discovered, these tend to have higher sediment supply as well, making it difficult to distinguish the relative contributions of the two processes. But Greenberg and Ganti's analysis revealed a clear trend: Migration was faster for rivers that carried a lot of sediment relative to their size. The model also showed vegetation slowing down river migration, as suggested by previous studies. However, the effect was much more modest, with unvegetated rivers migrating four times faster than similar-sized counterparts, rather than the 10-fold increase reported by some of their colleagues. This suggests that bar push has a stronger influence on meandering rivers than bank pull. That said, river behavior flows from the confluence of the two processes. "You can't have one dominate the other in a meandering river," Ganti said. "If you don't have enough sediment supply, bank pull will outpace bar push, and you'll end up with a braided river. And so it's really the balance between the bar push and the bank pull that creates these stable meandering rivers." Dams provide a ready-made case study for investigating the contributions of these two mechanisms, since the structures trap sediment but scarcely affect vegetation. When the authors looked at the movement of three North American rivers above and below notable dams, they found that migration rates slowed downstream, where the river was starved of sediment. They could now be certain that sediment load was driving bend migration. Greenberg is further investigating the effect dams have not just on meandering rivers, but on all the types of rivers that have floodplains. "We want to know what dams are doing to the migration of rivers," he said. Many of the world's most important waterways are meandering rivers, and hundreds of millions of people live along their floodplains, Ganti said. "So knowing how rivers move is important for managing the risks that come with bank migration. In previous papers, Ganti has documented how sea-level rise and changes in sediment supply could affect river dynamics in the future. The results paint a picture of more active, less predictable rivers, especially when combined with more extreme weather and changing land use. For instance, scientists predict that many rivers will see increased sediment supply. "More sediment means that rivers can do more stuff," he remarked. Ganti plans to broaden the scope of their model. While geographers and Earth scientists have historically focused on meandering rivers, the majority of the planet's waterways are wandering, multi-threaded rivers, he said. He and Greenberg are working on quantifying river mobility in general, across the many categories of rivers. Ideally, they want to develop a model that can describe a river's migration as it changes type along the entirety of its length, from headwater to sea.

The findings by an international team of scientists led by paleontologist Anthony Fiorillo were published Jan. 30 in the journal Geosciences . Fiorillo researched in Alaska while at Southern Methodist University. He is now executive director of the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science. University of Alaska Fairbanks geology professor Paul McCarthy, with the UAF Geophysical Institute and UAF College of Natural Science and Mathematics, was a leading contributor to the research. He and UAF graduate student Eric Orphys are among the eight co-authors. Fiorillo and McCarthy are longtime collaborators. "We've had projects for the last 20 years in Alaska trying to integrate sedimentology, dinosaur paleontology and the paleoclimate indicators," McCarthy said. "We've done work in three other formations -- in Denali, on the North Slope and in Southwest Alaska -- and they're about 70 million years old." "This new one is in a formation that's about 90 to 100 million years old," he said. Fiorillo said the additional age is notable. "What interested us about looking at rocks of this age is this is roughly the time that people think of as the beginning of the Bering Land Bridge -- the connection between Asia and North America," he said. "We want to know who was using it, how they were using it and what the conditions were like." Research into the paleoclimate can help scientists understand the warming world of today, the authors write. "The mid-Cretaceous was the hottest point in the Cretaceous," said McCarthy, a sedimentologist and fossil soils specialist. "The Nanushuk Formation gives us a snapshot of what a high-latitude ecosystem looks like on a warmer Earth." A rich find of evidence The Nanushuk Formation is an outcropped layer of sedimentary rock 800 to 5,000 feet thick across the central and western North Slope. It dates to roughly 94 million to 113 million years ago in the mid-Cretaceous Period and about when the Bering Land Bridge began. The fieldwork occurred in 2015-2017 and centered on Coke Basin, a circular geologic feature of the Nanushuk Formation. The basin is in the DeLong Mountains foothills along the Kukpowruk River, about 60 miles south of Point Lay and 20 miles inland from the Chukchi Sea. In the area, Fiorillo and McCarthy found approximately 75 fossil tracks and other indicators attributed to dinosaurs living in a riverine or delta setting. "This place was just crazy rich with dinosaur footprints," Fiorillo said. One site stands out, Fiorillo said. "We were at a spot where we eventually realized that for at least 400 yards we were walking on an ancient landscape," he said. "On that landscape we found large upright trees with little trees in between and leaves on the ground. We had tracks on the ground and fossilized feces." They found numerous fossilized tree stumps, some 2 feet in diameter. "It was just like we were walking through the woods of millions of years ago," he said. The Nanushuk Formation encompasses rock of marine and non-marine characteristics and composition, but the authors' research focuses primarily on the non-marine sediments exposed along the upper Kukpowruk River. "One of the things we did in our paper was look at the relative frequencies of the different kinds of dinosaurs," Fiorillo said. "What was interesting to us was that the bipedal plant eaters were clearly the most abundant." Two-legged plant eaters accounted for 59% of the total tracks discovered. Four-legged plant eaters accounted for 17%, with birds accounting for 15% and non-avian, mostly carnivorous, bipedal dinosaurs at 9%. "One of the things that was interesting is the relative frequency of bird tracks," Fiorillo said. The authors point out that nearly half of North America's shorebirds breed in the warm months of today's Arctic. They suggest that the high number of fossil bird tracks along the Kukpowruk River indicates the warm paleoclimate was a similar driver for Cretaceous Period birds. A wet and warm place Carbon isotope analysis of wood samples led to a determination that the region received about 70 inches of precipitation annually. This record of increased precipitation during the mid-Cretaceous provides new data that supports global precipitation patterns associated with the Cretaceous Thermal Maximum, the authors write. The Cretaceous Thermal Maximum was a long-term trend approximately 90 million years ago in which average global temperatures were significantly higher than those of today. "The temperature was much warmer than it is today, and what's possibly more interesting is that it rained a lot," Fiorillo said. "The samples we analyzed indicate it was roughly equivalent to modern-day Miami. That's pretty substantial." Of note is that the Alaska site investigated by Fiorillo and McCarthy was about 10 to 15 degrees latitude farther north in the mid-Cretaceous than it is today. McCarthy's role as a fossil soils expert was to analyze old rocks and sediments to interpret the type of environment that existed at the time. "We can say here's a river channel, here's a flood deposit, here's a levee, here's the floodplain, here's a swamp," he said. "And so if we're able to find tracks in that section, then you can sometimes say that a group of dinosaurs seems to have really liked being here as opposed to there." Fiorillo said the site indicates there's much more work to be done. "This puts a new dot on the map and tells us there's a lot here, and it fits into the bigger picture," he said. "The big picture is we're trying to get better resolution on what life was like in the high latitudes back at the time the dinosaurs were roaming around."

Weathering occurs where rock is exposed to water and wind. "When silicates weather, carbon is removed from the atmosphere and later precipitated as calcium carbonate. By contrast, weathering of other phases -- such as carbonates and sulfides or organic carbon contained in rocks -- releases CO 2 . These reactions are typically much faster than silicate weathering," says Hovius. "As a consequence, the impact of mountain building on the carbon cycle is complex." Weathering model shows common mechanisms To address this complexity, the researchers used a weathering model to analyze fluxes of sulfide, carbonate, and silicate weathering in a number of targeted study regions -- such as Taiwan and New Zealand -- with large ranges in erosion rates. "We discovered similar behaviors in all locations, pointing to common mechanisms," says Bufe . Further modelling showed that the relationship between erosion and CO 2 -fluxes is not linear, but that CO 2 capture from weathering peaks at an erosion rate of approximately 0.1 millimeters per year. When rates are lower or higher, less CO 2 is sequestered and CO 2 may even be released into the atmosphere. "High erosion rates like in Taiwan or the Himalayas push weathering into being a CO 2 source, because silicate weathering stops increasing with erosion rates at some point, whereas the weathering of carbonates and sulfides increases further," explains Bufe. In landscapes with moderate erosion rates of around 0.1 millimeters per year, the rapidly weathering carbonates and sulfides are largely depleted, whereas silicate minerals are abundant and weather efficiently. Where erosion is even slower than 0.1 millimeters per year, only few minerals are left to weather. The biggest CO 2 sinks are therefore low-relief mountain ranges such as the Black Forest or the Oregon Coast Range, where erosion rates approach the optimum. "Over geological timescales, the temperature to which Earth's 'thermostat' is set therefore depends strongly on the global distribution of erosion rates," says Bufe. To understand the effects of erosion on Earth's climate system in greater detail, Bufe thinks that future studies should additionally consider organic carbon sinks and weathering in floodplains.

The Flinders University research team, working in collaboration with the Njanjma Rangers and Erre Traditional Owners, used aerial and drone surveys, subsurface imaging and elevation data to create the first high-resolution palaeolandscape modelling to help understand 103 separate rock art sites in the region's rich Red Lily Lagoon area. What this innovative research has done is statistically model what the environmental conditions were like 15,000-28,000 years ago -- when even the floodplain floor was 7-15 metres lower than where it sits today. Flinders Associate Professor Ian Moffat says the research findings better informs how the sites would have been used, their accessibility and visibility -- what the Traditional Owner artists would have been looking at, watching out for and why. "When archaeologists interpret rock art, they often assume the landscape hasn't changed since the art was first inscribed which certainly isn't the case at Red Lily Lagoon," he explains. "This landscape has changed dramatically from being on the coast, a swamp, woodlands and freshwater -- and sometimes in just one lifetime. "Our innovative research approach adds new information to understand the rock art in a fundamentally different way. "Modelling the changes in environmental conditions over time sheds new light on the locations, where they were in in these landscapes, how they were selected and used, and the roles they held in community and clan life." This area of western Arnhem Land contains internationally renowned archaeological records, including Australia's oldest known archaeological site, and at the same time it has experienced colossal environmental landscape changes generated mostly by changing sea levels. Associate Professor Moffat says the research identifies these changes include the coastline moving from 100s of kilometres away to coming right up against the cliffs in the Red Lily region, before retreating northwards, about 50kms to its current position. He says the Flinders research traces the transformational impact rising sea levels had on the sandstone cliffs and flat floodplains terrain -- changing its open savanna to mudflats, to mangrove swamp, before evolving into the seasonally inundated freshwater wetlands of today. These changes would have had profound implications for people, how they moved, interacted and what they recorded at these locations. "Our research has enabled a clearer understanding of the placement of rock art sites that goes beyond relying on today's landscape as a reference point which is significant. Flinders College of Humanities Research Associate Dr Jarrad Kowlessar says this research identifies rock art production was most active, diverse in style, and covered most of the plateau area during a period when mangroves completely covered the floodplains -- approximately 6,000 years ago. "This may be because the mangroves provided abundant resources to sustain a large and stable human population at the time, or because the land had simply contracted so much due to the rising sea level that more people were in closer proximity," says Dr Kowlessar. "Interestingly most sites during this time were selected with views specifically overlooking mangrove areas. "We also identify that during the period when the sea level was rising, rock art was preferentially made in areas with long distance views over areas that had open woodlands at the time. So we can suggest these views may helped facilitate hunting, or even to more closely watch areas at a time when many people were being displaced by the rising water. "Without doubt the research demonstrates rock art site locations were intentionally selected, with nuanced relationships to the local landscape, and there is potential to use our modelling into the future to tell us much more about the rich and significant archaeology of Arnhem Land." The research team includes Dr Kowlessar, Flinders Senior Lecturer Dr Daryl Wesley, Associate Professor Moffat, Mark Willis (Flinders University), Tristen Jones (University of Sydney), Shay Wrigglesworth and Alfred Nayinggul (Njanjma Rangers), with special thanks to the support and contributions of the Njanjma Rangers and Kakadu National Park.

Until now, short-term climate fluctuations over hundreds of years could be analysed only by means of tree-ring records by combining independent measurements from a number of studies, explains geoscientist Dr Tobias Kluge of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT). The size of the tree rings, which varies by a few millimetres, provides information on the dynamics of seasonal precipitation, in turn pointing to climatic conditions in the specific growth period. According to Dr Kluge, summers with heavy rainfall are expected particularly in cold years, whereas very wet winters are expected in warm years. In contrast to tree rings, stalagmites have only been used in exceptional cases to systematically measure climate data and their annual variations. The decisive factor is the rainwater infiltrating a cave, whose dissolved lime forms the stalagmites. This water comes from local precipitation in the cold and warm seasons, and each is characterised by a special isotopic composition of oxygen. From this, analyses can be derived indicating whether and in which years winter or summer precipitation dominated. The researchers from Heidelberg and Karlsruhe studied a stalagmite -- a dripstone that grows upward from the floor of a cave -- from the "Kleine Teufelshöhle" in Franconian Switzerland. With a growth rate of one to four centimetres per millennium, or an annual growth rate of about the width of a single hair, this stalagmite grew much more slowly than comparable ones. The growth zones of the stalagmite are a hundred times thinner than a tree ring, so just a few centimetres can provide data on the climatic conditions over a thousand years. The composition of oxygen isotopes was measured using the ion probe at the Institute of Earth Sciences of Heidelberg University. "The analyses required precise measurements within the annual growth zones of just a few micrometres, which is possible only with this type of large-scale research device," explains Prof. Dr Mario Trieloff, head of the Heidelberg Ion Probe laboratory. The researchers report that the climate data acquired from the "Kleine Teufelshöhle" stalagmite revealed regional as well as global environmental events. The unusually cold year of 1816, which went down in history as the Year Without a Summer, stemmed from an eruption of the Tambora volcano in Indonesia in April of 1815, possibly exacerbated by a hitherto unknown volcanic eruption six years before. The data from the stalagmite measurements show that summers were cold and winters very wet during this time, which combined with year-round flooding led to poor harvests and famine. The information stored in the stalagmite also provides evidence on long-term climate fluctuations such as the Little Ice Age, whose core period began at the end of the 16th century and lasted until the late 17th century. According to the researchers, this period was marked by frequent flooding, which is historically documented in the city of Nuremberg not far from the "Teufelshöhle." The climate data from the cave was verified using a tree-ring archive from the vicinity. The data point to cold dry winters that delayed the annual ice and snow melts, leading to major short-term floods with catastrophic consequences, explains Dr Kluge from the Institute of Applied Geosciences at the KIT. The research results were published in the journal Earth and Planetary Science Letters . Along with the scientists from Heidelberg and Karlsruhe, researchers from Berlin, Hohenheim, and Mannheim participated in the investigations.

The researchers found a link between the size of boulders in the rivers and the steepness of the rivers. The link shows how rock properties can influence the relationship between tectonic processes happening deep underground and how mountainous landscapes change shape. They reported in the journal Science Advances. "Over the course of a mountain belt developing, we're seeing differences in how rivers incise, or cut down into the bedrock, in the younger and older sections," said Julia Carr, lead author of the study who earned her doctorate in geosciences from Penn State in 2022. "It means that as a mountain belt evolves, erosion is changing at the surface." As tectonic plates collide and form mountain ranges, rocks that were previously buried in the Earth's crust are pushed to the surface in a process called uplift. The temperature and pressure that these rocks experience leads to variability in rock properties -- like rock hardness or the spacing and orientation of fractures -- that then affect how easily they are eroded by elements at the surface, the scientists said. In Taiwan, the scientists found the main signature of rock strength of the mountains was the size of boulders in rivers, which were larger and stronger in locations where rocks had been buried deeper in Earth's crust. And the size of boulders correlated with the steepness of the rivers, which must be powerful enough to move these boulders downstream before eroding the mountain, the scientists said. "When the boulders in the channels are larger, the river needs to steepen to be able to erode at the same rate," said Roman DiBiase, associate professor of geosciences at Penn State and co-author of the study. "This is because in order to erode rock, the sediment covering a river channel needs to move out of the way. The larger the boulders in the channel, the steeper the channel needs to be to move them." Models can account for how things like storms and floods impact erosion rates, but it's harder to factor the role of rock strength on the process, the scientists said. "Determining the controls on river incision into rock is important for understanding how mountain ranges evolve over geologic time," DiBiase said. "But some key parameters for testing models of river incision, such as flow depth and sediment cover, are difficult to measure at large scales." The researchers turned to drones to avoid obstacles like hazardous river crossings and waterfalls to collect data. During these surveys, the scientists collected hundreds of thousands of measurements of river channel morphology and more than 22,000 measurements of boulders along roughly 18 miles of rivers. "That's where it's really unprecedented -- something of this scale is really unusual," said Carr, who conducted the research at Penn State and is now a postdoctoral fellow at Simon Fraser University in British Columbia. "It's exciting to be able to survey at this scale -- it helps us see patterns we really would otherwise never see. If you just went into the field and surveyed the few spots you could get to easily, you would not observe this pattern." Taiwan's central mountain range is one of the steepest landscapes on Earth and has one of the highest erosion rates of any place outside glaciated or human-influenced areas, Carr said. In addition, the tectonic setting of Taiwan is well known and has systematic burial depth patterns that can be used to evaluate the connection between subsurface history of rocks and their current condition at the surface. "It's this great unique place because unlike somewhere like the Himalayas or the Alps, where there's so many complex tectonic histories, Taiwan can be a relatively simple landscape to study because the same collision forces that created it millions of years ago are still active today," Carr said. "And these lessons learned from Taiwan can help inform erosion models that are applied to other mountain ranges with fewer constraints." Because of how the range formed, younger rocks are found in the south and west, while older rocks that were buried deeper -- up to 24 miles underground -- are found further east and north, the scientists said. In the younger sections, rivers have fewer, smaller boulders that cover less of the area of the channels. And as you travel toward the older sections, the boulders increase to a median size of more than six feet, the scientists said. These boulders aren't sitting in the rivers waiting to be broken down over time, according to the researchers. Instead, boulders in each of the sections of rivers were close to the threshold of mobility -- meaning the water was nearly powerful enough to move them downstream. During high flows after storms, these boulders may be fully mobile, and as they move, they help incise the river. "One way you can think about how rivers incise long term -- you need to be able to move sediment, and once you cross over some threshold, you can incise the river," Carr said. "If we apply this, it implies this primary rock strength signal controlling boulder size is setting river incision in the landscape. And that matches with the local steepness of the rivers." Also contributing were Donald Fisher, professor of geosciences at Penn State; En-Chao Yeh, associate professor at National Taiwan Normal University; and Eric Kirby, professor at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The National Science Foundation supported this work. Link to drone video footage: https://youtu.be/uER7H-zm1yE

Their success resolves a long-standing geology mystery called the "Dolomite Problem." Dolomite -- a key mineral in the Dolomite mountains in Italy, Niagara Falls, the White Cliffs of Dover and Utah's Hoodoos -- is very abundant in rocks older than 100 million years, but nearly absent in younger formations. "If we understand how dolomite grows in nature, we might learn new strategies to promote the crystal growth of modern technological materials," said Wenhao Sun, the Dow Early Career Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at U-M and the corresponding author of the paper published today in Science . The secret to finally growing dolomite in the lab was removing defects in the mineral structure as it grows. When minerals form in water, atoms usually deposit neatly onto an edge of the growing crystal surface. However, the growth edge of dolomite consists of alternating rows of calcium and magnesium. In water, calcium and magnesium will randomly attach to the growing dolomite crystal, often lodging into the wrong spot and creating defects that prevent additional layers of dolomite from forming. This disorder slows dolomite growth to a crawl, meaning it would take 10 million years to make just one layer of ordered dolomite. Luckily, these defects aren't locked in place. Because the disordered atoms are less stable than atoms in the correct position, they are the first to dissolve when the mineral is washed with water. Repeatedly rinsing away these defects -- for example, with rain or tidal cycles -- allows a dolomite layer to form in only a matter of years. Over geologic time, mountains of dolomite can accumulate. To simulate dolomite growth accurately, the researchers needed to calculate how strongly or loosely atoms will attach to an existing dolomite surface. The most accurate simulations require the energy of every single interaction between electrons and atoms in the growing crystal. Such exhaustive calculations usually require huge amounts of computing power, but software developed at U-M's Predictive Structure Materials Science (PRISMS) Center offered a shortcut. "Our software calculates the energy for some atomic arrangements, then extrapolates to predict the energies for other arrangements based on the symmetry of the crystal structure," said Brian Puchala, one of the software's lead developers and an associate research scientist in U-M's Department of Materials Science and Engineering. That shortcut made it feasible to simulate dolomite growth over geologic timescales. "Each atomic step would normally take over 5,000 CPU hours on a supercomputer. Now, we can do the same calculation in 2 milliseconds on a desktop," said Joonsoo Kim, a doctoral student of materials science and engineering and the study's first author. The few areas where dolomite forms today intermittently flood and later dry out, which aligns well with Sun and Kim's theory. But such evidence alone wasn't enough to be fully convincing. Enter Yuki Kimura, a professor of materials science from Hokkaido University, and Tomoya Yamazaki, a postdoctoral researcher in Kimura's lab. They tested the new theory with a quirk of transmission electron microscopes. "Electron microscopes usually use electron beams just to image samples," Kimura said. "However, the beam can also split water, which makes acid that can cause crystals to dissolve. Usually this is bad for imaging, but in this case, dissolution is exactly what we wanted." After placing a tiny dolomite crystal in a solution of calcium and magnesium, Kimura and Yamazaki gently pulsed the electron beam 4,000 times over two hours, dissolving away the defects. After the pulses, dolomite was seen to grow approximately 100 nanometers -- around 250,000 times smaller than an inch. Although this was only 300 layers of dolomite, never had more than five layers of dolomite been grown in the lab before. The lessons learned from the Dolomite Problem can help engineers manufacture higher-quality materials for semiconductors, solar panels, batteries and other tech. "In the past, crystal growers who wanted to make materials without defects would try to grow them really slowly," Sun said. "Our theory shows that you can grow defect-free materials quickly, if you periodically dissolve the defects away during growth." The research was funded by the American Chemical Society PRF New Doctoral Investigator grant, the U.S. Department of Energy and the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science.

To help unravel the mystery of how the Earth cycles fossil carbon, Rice University's Mark Torres and collaborators studied the chemistry of a river system extending from the Peruvian Andes to the Amazon floodplains. Together with collaborators from five other institutions, Torres helped show that high rates of carbon breakdown persist from mountaintop to floodplain, as the carbon bound in rock that was once prehistoric ocean floor gets released into the atmosphere through erosion and weathering. According to a study published in PNAS , the researchers used rhenium ⎯ a silvery-gray, heavy transition metal ⎯ as a proxy for carbon. Understanding the Earth's natural, pre-anthropogenic carbon cycle offers valuable insights into the planet's history and its response to current climate challenges. "The purpose of this research was to quantify the rate at which Earth naturally releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and find out whether this process varies across different geographic locations," Torres said. Traditionally, understanding this process has been challenging as it involves complex chemical reactions that transform rocks into gases like carbon dioxide, making it difficult to quantify. "This research used a newly-developed technique pioneered by Robert Hilton and Mathieu Dellinger that relies on a trace element ⎯ rhenium ⎯ that's incorporated in fossil organic matter," Torres said. "As plankton die and sink to the bottom of the ocean, that dead carbon becomes chemically reactive in a way that adds rhenium to it." Over vast periods of time, geological processes can cause the rock on the ocean floor to be thrust to the Earth's surface as mountain ranges and the ancient carbon locked in the rock gets slowly released in the atmosphere. As this happens, rhenium is left behind, which can be measured in water. Unlike other elements in fossil carbon ⎯ such as nitrogen or phosphorus ⎯ which are taken up by plants or become part of other chemical or biological processes, rhenium is relatively inert, making it a good tool for gauging how much carbon gets released into the atmosphere from the Earth's crust. "Organisms don't care about it ⎯ it's not a nutrient," Torres said. "It just passively gets incorporated into rivers, where we can measure it. A good proxy is one that only responds to the process you're trying to study. "You have to know a lot about rhenium as an element and its chemistry and the environment to be able to interpret it in this way. There is a lot of interpretive work that has had to come before these measurements that allows us to say that the only host for this element is the fossil carbon evaporated into the atmosphere." The Rio Madre de Dios basin was an ideal location for studying this question because it provided a natural gradient from the heights of one of the tallest mountain ranges down to the floodplains of the world's largest river by volume. Moreover, the rock types exposed at this site are carbon-rich shales, which Torres says is exactly what you would want to study in this case. "I'm very excited about this tool," Torres said. "Rice students have deployed this same method in our lab here, so now we can make this kind of measurement and apply it at other sites. In fact, as part of current research funded by the National Science Foundation, we are applying this technique in Southern California to learn how tectonics and climate influence the breakdown of fossil carbon." By grasping the slow processes that govern our planet's carbon cycle, scientists can build more accurate climate models and work toward more effective strategies of mitigating the impact of anthropogenic carbon emissions. Torres is an assistant professor of Earth, environmental and planetary sciences at Rice. Hilton, a professor of sedimentary geology at the University of Oxford, and Dellinger, a researcher at Université Savoie Mont Blanc, are lead authors on the study. The research was supported by the European Research Council Starting Grant -- ROC-CO2 (678779), the European Union COFUND/Durham Junior Research Fellowship (267209) and the National Science Foundation (1455352, 1851309, 20000097).

In one watershed, these extreme floods also became more than twice as large, turning a once-in-70-years event into something that now happens every nine. "This research challenges conventional thinking about forest management's impact on flooding," said senior author Dr. Younes Alila, a hydrologist in the UBC faculty of forestry. "We hope the industry and policymakers will take note of the findings, which show that it matters not only how much forest you remove but also where, how and under what conditions." Same treatment, different floods The UBC-led study draws on one of the world's longest-running forest experiments at the Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory in North Carolina and is published in the Journal of Hydrology . The research team analyzed two adjacent watersheds, one north-facing, the other south-facing, that were both clear-cut in the late 1950s. "We found seemingly minor landscape factors -- like the direction a slope faces -- can make or break a watershed's response to treatment," said first author Henry Pham, a doctoral student in the faculty of forestry. In the north-facing watershed, which receives less direct sunlight and retains more moisture, floods became four to 18 times more frequent. Average flood sizes increased by 47 percent compared to pre-treatment levels, and the biggest floods grew by as much as 105 percent. In the south-facing watershed, the same treatment had virtually no impact on flood behavior. Old flood models inadequate Most conventional flood models use simplified assumptions: cut X percent of trees, expect Y percent more water runoff. But this study found that such models fail to account for extreme and erratic flood patterns that emerge after landscape disturbances. "This experimental evidence validates our longstanding call for better analysis methods," said Dr. Alila. "When we apply proper probabilistic tools to long-term data, we find much stronger and more variable impacts than older models suggest." In short, he adds, forest treatments don't just raise average flood levels -- they can fundamentally reshape a watershed's entire flood regime, making rare and catastrophic events much more common. The most concerning finding was that flood effects in the north-facing watershed persisted for over 40 years, confirming that forestry treatments can lead to long-term changes in a watershed's flood response, especially as climate change brings more extreme weather, putting downstream communities at greater risk. Policy implications The findings have immediate relevance for forest management practices, particularly in B.C. where there are similar terrain types and forestry operations in the form of clear-cut logging. Dr. Alila noted that the model used in this study can be used to predict which parts of B.C. are currently more at risk of extreme flooding. It can also be used to investigate how much of the severity of Sumas Prairie floods in 2021 and the more recent Texas floods can be attributed to global warming and/or land use and forest cover changes. "Our findings highlight how multiple landscape factors interact in complex ways. As climate conditions shift, understanding those dynamics is becoming increasingly important for forest and water management."

Prof. Piers Forster, Director of the Priestley Centre for Climate Futures at the University of Leeds and lead author of the study, said: "Our third annual edition of Indicators of Global Climate Change shows that both warming levels and rates of warming are unprecedented. Continued record-high emissions of greenhouse gases mean more of us are experiencing unsafe levels of climate impacts. Temperatures have risen year-on-year since the last IPCC report in 2021, highlighting how climate policies and pace of climate action are not keeping up with what's needed to address the ever-growing impacts." This year's update of key climate system indicators carried out by a team of over 60 international scientists included two additional indicators, sea-level rise and global land precipitation, to give a total of 10 indicators1. This information is crucial for decision-makers seeking a current, comprehensive picture of the state of the global climate system. In 2024, the best estimate of observed global surface temperature rise was 1.52°C, of which 1.36°C can be attributed to human activity2. The high level of human-induced warming and its high warming rate are due to global greenhouse gas emissions remaining at an all-time high in recent years. According to the study, 2024's high temperatures are "alarmingly unexceptional," given the level of human-caused climate change. This human influence is at an all-time high and, combined with natural variability in the climate system (which causes temperatures to vary naturally year-to-year), has pushed global average temperature rise to record levels. While reaching 1.5°C of global temperature rise in a single year does not mean there has been any breach of the landmark Paris Agreement - for that, average global temperatures would need to exceed 1.5°C over multiple decades - these results do reaffirm how far and fast emissions are heading in the wrong direction. And the impacts will only stop worsening when CO2 emissions from fossil fuels and deforestation reach net zero. When analysing longer-term temperature change, best estimates show that between 2015-2024 average global temperatures were 1.24°C higher than in pre-industrial times, with 1.22°C caused by human activities, meaning that, essentially, our best estimate is that all of the warming we have seen over the last decade has been human-induced. Human activities have resulted in the equivalent of around 53 billion tonnes of CO2 (Gt CO2e) being released into the atmosphere each year over the last decade, primarily due to increasing emissions from burning fossil fuels and deforestation. In 2024, emissions from international aviation - the sector with the steepest drop in emissions during the pandemic - also returned to pre-pandemic levels. GHG emissions have also led to higher levels of greenhouse gases accumulating in the atmosphere. Combined with declines in emissions of sulphur dioxide (SO2) leading to planet-cooling aerosols, the outcome is that the planet is continuing to heat up. The damage caused by aerosols to human health far outweighs any minimal cooling 'gains', and there are other short-lived GHGs that can and should be tackled alongside CO2, such as methane (CH4), that could provide a short-term cooling compensating for the aerosol decline. Human activities have also been affecting the Earth's energy balance. Surplus heat accumulating in the Earth's system at an accelerating rate is driving changes in every component of the climate system. The rate of global heating seen between 2012 and 2024 has about doubled from the levels seen in the 1970s and 1980s, leading to detrimental changes of vital components, including sea level rise, ocean warming, ice loss, and permafrost thawing. Dr. Karina Von Schuckmann, Senior Advisor, Ocean Science for Policy at Mercator Ocean International said: "The ocean is storing about 91% of this excess heat driven by greenhouse gas emissions, which leads to ocean warming. Warmer waters lead to rising sea levels and intensified weather extremes, and can have devastating impacts on marine ecosystems and the communities that rely on them. In 2024, the ocean reached record values globally." Between 2019 and 2024, global mean sea level has also increased by around 26 mm, more than doubling the long-term rate of 1.8 mm per year seen since the turn of the twentieth century. Dr. Aimée Slangen, Research Leader at the NIOZ Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research said: "Since 1900, the global mean sea level has risen by around 228 mm. This seemingly small number is having an outsized impact on low-lying coastal areas, making storm surges more damaging and causing more coastal erosion, posing a threat to humans and coastal ecosystems. The concerning part is that we know that sea-level rise in response to climate change is relatively slow, which means that we have already locked in further increases in the coming years and decades." IPCC's last assessment of the climate system, published in 2021, highlighted how climate change was leading to widespread adverse impacts on nature and people, with rapid and deep reductions in GHGs emissions needed to limit warming to 1.5°C. Prof. Joeri Rogelj, Research Director at the Grantham Institute and Climate Science & Policy Professor at the Centre for Environmental Policy at Imperial College London said: "The window to stay within 1.5°C is rapidly closing. Global warming is already affecting the lives of billions of people around the world. Every small increase in warming matters, leading to more frequent, more intense weather extremes. Emissions over the next decade will determine how soon and how fast 1.5°C of warming is reached. They need to be swiftly reduced to meet the climate goals of the Paris Agreement." Other key findings: 1) Full list of indicators: 2) The study calculated 1.52°C as the best estimate of observed global surface temperature in 2024. This number differs from the 1.55°C given by the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) State of the Global Climate 2024 report. This is owed to slightly distinct selections from the available datasets included. The number has varied by similar amounts in past years. Future work will aim to harmonise the approaches.

In the new study, an international team of 21 scientists from ten countries used eight glacier models to calculate the potential ice loss from more than 200,000 glaciers outside of Greenland and Antarctica. The team evaluated a wide range of global temperature scenarios, assuming that temperatures would remain constant for thousands of years in each scenario. "The choices we make today will resonate for centuries, determining how much of our glaciers can be preserved," says Harry Zekollari, co-lead author from Vrije Universiteit Brussel, who began this research as a postdoctoral fellow at the Chair of Glaciology in the Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering (D-BAUG) at ETH Zurich. Looking beyond 2100 reveals new insights In all scenarios, the glaciers lose mass rapidly over decades and then continue to melt at a slower pace for centuries -- even without additional warming. This long-term response means glaciers will continue to feel the effects of today's heat far into the future, gradually retreating to higher altitudes before reaching a new equilibrium. "One of the key strengths of our study is that we were able, for the first time, to project global glacier evolution over multi-centennial timescales, and did so using eight models instead of one or two," explains Harry Zekollari. "Most glacier studies stop at 2100, which is problematic when simulating the long-term impact of today's climate policies, given the long-term response of glaciers over time." For example, while studies limited to the year 2100 estimate that around 20 per cent of today's glacier mass will be lost regardless of future warming, the new study reveals that nearly twice as much would vanish under present-day conditions when multi-centennial timescales are considered. "We find that around 40 per cent of glacier mass is effectively 'doomed' to disappear," says co-lead author Harry Zekollari. Melting glaciers reveal the reality of global warming "Glaciers are good indicators of climate change because their retreat allows us to see with our own eyes how climate is changing. However, since they adjust over longer timescales, their current size vastly understates the magnitude of climate change that has already happened. The situation for glaciers is actually far worse than visible in the mountains today," says co-lead author Lilian Schuster from the University of Innsbruck. Beyond contributing to sea-level rise, glacier loss has far-reaching consequences. It threatens freshwater availability, increases the risk of glacier-related hazards such as floods and landslides, and jeopardizes glacier-fed tourism economies. These cascading impacts will be felt across regions and generations. "These effects underscore the critical importance of present-day climate policies," says Harry Zekollari. "Our study makes it painfully clear that every fraction of a degree matters. If we manage to limit global warming to +1.5°C instead of +2.7°C, we could still save twice as much glacier ice." Current policies are projected to lead to an average global warming of around +2.7°C. As Zekollari emphasizes, the degree of warming between +1.5°C and +3.0°C plays a decisive role in glacier loss. Put simply: for every additional 0.1°C of warming, the world risks losing approximately 2per cent more of its glacier ice. Contributing to the UN-Year of Glaciers' Preservation "This study is a major contribution to the United Nations International Year of Glaciers' Preservation, emphasizing the urgent need for global climate action to protect the world's glaciers," says Daniel Farinotti, Professor of Glaciology at ETH Zurich and the Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow and Landscape Research WSL. His research group at the Laboratory of Hydraulics, Hydrology and Glaciology (VAW) played a central role in producing the new findings. The entire study led by Zekollari and Schuster was conducted as part of the Glacier Model Intercomparison Project (GlacierMIP) and coordinated by the Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) Project of the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP). Farinotti notes that the release of the Science study coincides with the opening of the High-Level International Conference on Glaciers' Preservation , initiated by the President of Tajikistan through the United Nations (UN) Resolution that established both the UN Year of Glaciers' Preservation and, later, the UN Decade of Action for the Cryospheric Sciences 2025-2034. On the Swiss side, the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs (FDFA) was invited to support the organisation of the event, particularly in drafting what is intended to become the "Dushanbe Glacier Declaration." Daniel Farinotti, for his part, is acting as an advisor to the FDFA in the preparation of the declaration.

University of Illinois civil engineer Eun Jeong Cha and her colleague Chi-Ying Lin used machine learning to simulate the impact of future hurricanes on wooden single-family homes with concrete masonry in Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina. Over the last decade, these states have been hit hard by destructive storms like Hurricane Irma (2017) and Hurricane Helene (2024). Helene's estimated total costs -- which included damages from record-breaking flooding in western Carolina -- were $78.7 billion. "These states experience the highest hurricane activity and associated wind-related losses in the U.S.," says Cha. "They represent a critical region for understanding how climate change may alter hurricane risk, especially given their large coastal exposure and growing population centers." Worst-Case Scenario Cha's simulation of future losses from increasing hurricane winds and rainfall utilizes projections based on the worst-case scenario of global warming from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Known as RCP8.5, this scenario represents the highest possible greenhouse gas emissions in the absence of policies to combat climate change. It estimates that the earth's average global surface temperature will be 2.0° C higher by 2065 and 3.7° C higher by 2100 (relative to the 1986-2005 baseline). "The worst-case scenario is widely used to explore high-impact possibilities for long-term planning and resilience studies," says Cha. "We view it as a stress-test scenario for hurricane wind risk." Under this scenario, the simulation projected that, in the eight southeastern coastal states: Losses from wind and rain-ingress (when water enters a building) will be 49-76% higher by 2060 and 71-102% higher by 2100. Hurricane wind speeds in Texas will be 14 percent higher in the 2050s compared to present-day levels. Texas will experience the highest increase in expected losses, followed by the region of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. Some inland counties, such as Charleston, South Carolina, may experience a relatively large percentage increase in projected risk. At the county level, Cha and her colleagues found variations of hurricane risk associated with climate change, along with differences in regional preparation for hurricane wind hazards. The increasing vulnerability of the county of Charleston, South Carolina, may stem from a combination of projected increases in hurricane intensity, low historical exposure, and infrastructure that has not been stress-tested under more extreme wind and rain conditions. "Within a state, climate change impact varies from coastal to inland counties," says Cha. "The discrepancies we found emphasize the necessity of vast regional risk assessment for federal- and state-level resource allocation and risk mitigation planning, considering the impact of climate change." Insurance Models Need to Account for Heavier Rainfall Hurricane winds account for over 40 percent of storm-related losses in the residential sector, causing $14 billion in expected annual costs to the U.S. economy, according to a 2019 report from the Congressional Budget Office. Yet most hurricane models used by insurance companies fail to consider the impact of climate change. In particular, says Cha, "rain-ingresses are often overlooked in risk assessments." This is why her study considered damages from both stronger winds and heavier rain from future hurricanes in the southeastern coastal states. Another study recently published in Risk Analysis focuses on the connection between extreme rainfall and extreme insurance claims. Yue Shi, a PhD candidate at the Norwegian School of Economics conducted a study of how extreme rainfall and climate-related events affect home insurance claims. Like Cha, she found increasing risk over time and significant geographical differences -- pointing to a need for new insurance models as the climate gets wetter. Accurately estimating hurricane hazards and resulting losses is essential, says Cha. "Our findings contribute significantly to our understanding of climate change impacts on hurricane risks, providing valuable insights for policymakers, urban planners, and the insurance industry."

This is only for one birth year; when instead taking into account all children who are between 5 and 18 years old today, this adds up to 1.5 billion children affected under a 3.5°C scenario, and with 654 million children that can be protected by remaining under the 1.5°C threshold. The study also highlights that children with high socioeconomic vulnerability face an even greater likelihood of unprecedented exposure to climate extremes in their lifetime. Deep cuts in greenhouse gas emissions are urgently needed to safeguard the lives of children all around the world. Climate change's disproportionate burden on youth Climate extremes, including heatwaves, crop failures, river floods, tropical cyclones, wildfires and droughts, will intensify with continued atmospheric warming. Today's children will endure more climate extremes then any previous generation. "In 2021, we demonstrated how children are to face disproportionate increases in extreme event exposure -- especially in low-income countries. Now, we examined where the cumulative exposure to climate extremes across one's lifetime will far exceed that which would have been experienced in a pre-industrial climate" says Wim Thiery, professor of climate science at VUB and senior author of the study. "In this new study, living an unprecedented life means that without climate change, one would have less than a 1-in-10,000 chance of experiencing that many climate extremes across one's lifetime" says Dr. Luke Grant, lead author and climate scientist at the VUB and Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). "This is a stringent threshold that identifies populations facing climate extremes far beyond what could be expected without man-made climate change." The threshold varies by location and type of climate extreme. By combining demographic data and climate model projections of climate extremes for each location on earth, the researchers calculated the percentage of each generation born between 1960 and 2020 who will face unprecedented exposure to climate extremes in their lifetime. Generational impact of climate change The younger a person is, the higher their likelihood of unprecedented exposure to climate extremes. Even if we successfully limit global warming to 1.5°C, 52% of children born in 2020 will face unprecedented heatwave exposure, compared to only 16% of those born in 1960. For heatwaves, the effect is particularly pronounced for those born after 1980, when climate change scenarios increasingly dictate exposure levels. "By stabilizing our climate around 1.5 °C above pre-industrial temperatures, about half of today's young people will be exposed to an unprecedented number of heatwaves in their lifetime. Under a 3.5 °C scenario, over 90% will endure such exposure throughout their lives," warns Grant. "The same picture emerges for other climate extremes examined, though with slightly lower affected fractions of the population. Yet the same unfair generational differences in unprecedented exposure is observed." Children in tropical countries will bear the worst burden under a 1.5 °C scenario. However, under high-emission scenarios, nearly all children worldwide face the prospect of living an unprecedented life (see Figure 2). Climate vulnerability and social injustice The study also highlights the social injustice of climate change and its impacts. Under current climate policies, the most socioeconomically vulnerable children born in 2020 will almost all (95%) endure unprecedented exposure to heatwaves in their lifetime, compared to 78% for the least vulnerable group. "Precisely the most vulnerable children experience the worst escalation of climate extremes. With limited resources and adaptation options, they face disproportionate risks," says Thiery. Urgent Need for Global Climate Action Ahead of COP30 in Brazil, nations must submit updated climate commitments. Under current policies, global warming would reach around 2.7 °C this century. This study and the related Save The Children report emphasize the urgency of keeping global warming below 1.5 °C for the children of today and tomorrow. Inger Ashing, CEO of Save the Children International, said: "Across the world, children are forced to bear the brunt of a crisis they are not responsible for. Dangerous heat that puts their health and learning at risk; cyclones that batter their homes and schools; creeping droughts that shrivel up crops and shrink what's on their plates. Amid this daily drumbeat of disasters, children plead with us not to switch off. This new research shows there is still hope, but only if we act urgently and ambitiously to rapidly limit warming temperatures to 1.5 °C, and truly put children front and centre of our response to climate change." "With global emissions still rising and the planet only 0.2 °C away from the 1.5 °C threshold, world leaders must step up to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and lessen the climate burden on today's youth," concludes Thiery. The study was accomplished by researchers from Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Environment and Climate Change Canada, KU Leuven, the Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium (RMI), and ETH Zurich. Supplementary information The numbers reported in our new study focus on one single birth cohort: children born in 2020, who are today's five year olds. Climate extremes will affect all generations, with children the most. We are providing therefore here below numbers that take into account all children who are between 5 and 18 years old today, which represents a total population of 1.69 billion children. Heatwaves Under a 1.5 °C pathway, 855 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to heatwaves. Under a 2.7 °C pathway, 1353 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to heatwaves. Under a 3.5 °C pathway, 1509 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to heatwaves. Crop failures Under a 1.5 °C pathway, 316 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to crop failures. Under a 2.7 °C pathway, 400 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to crop failures. Under a 3.5 °C pathway, 431 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to crop failures. Wildfires Under a 1.5 °C pathway, 119 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to wildfires. Under a 2.7 °C pathway, 134 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to wildfires. Under a 3.5 °C pathway, 147 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to wildfires. Droughts Under a 1.5 °C pathway, 89 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to droughts. Under a 2.7 °C pathway, 111 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to droughts. Under a 3.5 °C pathway, 116 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to droughts. River floods Under a 1.5 °C pathway, 132 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to river floods. Under a 2.7 °C pathway, 188 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to river floods. Under a 3.5 °C pathway, 191 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to river floods. Tropical cyclones Under a 1.5 °C pathway, 101 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to tropical cyclones. Under a 2.7 °C pathway, 163 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to tropical cyclones. Under a 3.5 °C pathway, 163 million children aged 5-18 in 2025 face unprecedented lifetime exposure to tropical cyclones.

Methane is responsible for roughly 19% of global warming, according to the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration. And while wetlands are champions at removing carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) -- the more abundant greenhouse gas -- they are also the world's largest natural source of methane. As nations set targets to bring down methane emitted from human activity, it is crucial to understand how much methane wetlands emit naturally -- and how much more they could emit in the future. "If there is a large amount of methane emissions from wetlands, and if we don't know anything about that, then our carbon reduction target for mitigating climate change is going to be off track in the future," said lead author Jaehyun Lee. Lee, who now works at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology, did the study while a postdoctoral fellow at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center. Microbial Tug-of-War In wetland soils, two types of microbes are locked in competition. Some microbes produce methane, a greenhouse gas up to 45 times stronger than CO 2 . But other microbes consume that methane, using oxygen to turn it into less-harmful CO 2 . That simple transformation is one of nature's most powerful ways to keep greenhouse gas emissions in check. The new study, published in the journal Science Advances , focused on a special class of microbes known as anaerobic. Anaerobic microbes live in places without free oxygen -- zones that are quite common in flooded wetlands. For a long time, they have been the underdogs in the methane wars. With no free oxygen to draw from, these microbes were believed to be unable to consume methane. When scientists finally discovered they could (by pulling oxygen from nearby sulfate molecules), they still thought it was a minor background effect compared to the microbes in oxygen-rich parts of the wetland. "They thought that the anaerobic methane [consumption] process is going to be too slow to remove a significant amount of methane," Lee said. But as Lee pointed out, most methane production happens in these oxygen-starved environments. This essentially means anaerobic microbes are on the front lines. And they are pulling their weight. In the Smithsonian wetland Lee worked in, anaerobic microbes can remove up to 12% of the methane -- far less than their oxygen-loving counterparts, but more than scientists previously suspected. And in saltier, sulfate-rich places, anaerobic microbes can remove up to 70% of the methane produced in oxygen-deprived soils. However, things changed when scientists dialed up the heat. A Fast-Forward Climate Experiment In the new study, the team simulated a hotter future using an experiment on a wetland at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC) in Maryland. The experiment goes by the name "SMARTX" (short for "Salt Marsh Accretion Response to Temperature eXperiment"). Scientists raised the temperature by 5.1 degrees Celsius in certain parts of the wetland by energizing rows of infrared lamps and underground cables. In some plots, the team also raised CO 2 to create a more realistic future. "You're never going to get a warmer world without also having higher CO 2 in the atmosphere….What SMARTX is doing is trying to mimic that warmer world, with the aboveground and belowground heating," said Genevieve Noyce, a coauthor and senior scientist at SERC. "But because that's not going to happen independent of CO 2 , we also cross it with CO 2 , so we have a real future that has both." Methane emissions spiked under hotter temperatures alone. This was not because the helpful microbes became weaker. Warmer soils triggered them to remove even more methane than before. However, their competitors -- the microbes that produce methane -- became more active as well. And in a warmer world, the methane-removing microbes were unable to keep up. Howmuch methane emissions went up depended on the plants. In areas dominated by thick sedges, methane emissions rose nearly four times higher. But where smaller grasses prevailed, methane emissions increased only 1.5 times. Ironically, higher CO 2 lessened the impact -- but not enough to cancel it out. Methane emissions in the sedge plots rose to just double normal levels, rather than nearly quadrupling, when scientists tested higher temperatures and higher CO 2 together. The researchers suspect this is because CO 2 triggers plants to grow bigger roots. Roots inject more oxygen into the soil, creating even more oxygen-rich sulfate compounds for the microbes to use. "Warming is going to have a really big effect on increasing methane emissions," Noyce said. "But when you add elevated CO 2 , it kind of brings it back down a little bit." This pattern holds for microbes across the entire wetland. In 2021, the team discovered that microbes in oxygen-rich soils behave the same way as the oxygen-starved microbes in this study. When the environment heats up, microbes that remove methane fall further behind their methane-producing cousins. Conserving wetlands is still a vital part of protecting the world from climate change, the authors said. They are lifesaving buffers from hurricanes and extreme weather. And despite the methane issue, wetlands excel at locking away planet-warming carbon in other forms. An acre of coastal wetland can store more carbon than an acre of tropical rainforest. "There is great value in protecting and restoring coastal wetlands to benefit climate, especially when we consider the many ecosystem services they provide to people," said Pat Megonigal, the senior author and associate director of research at SERC. But to plan for the future, policymakers need to know how much methane wetlands will emit in the decades to come. At the end of the day, Lee said, climate change is not only about hotter temperatures. It is also about the invisible activities that could tip the balance of greenhouse gases. "We also have to consider, how is climate change going to affect these delicate microbial processes, such as methane oxidation and methane production?" he said.

The discrepancy between model results and observed cooling, Stanford University scientists have now found, comes down mainly to missing meltwater and underestimated rainfall. "We found that the Southern Ocean cooling trend is actually a response to global warming, which accelerates ice sheet melting and local precipitation," said Earle Wilson, an assistant professor of Earth system science in the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability and senior author of the March 27 study in Geophysical Research Letters . As rising temperatures melt Antarctica's ice sheet and cause more precipitation, the Southern Ocean's upper layer is growing less salty -- and thus, less dense. This creates a lid that limits the exchange of cool surface waters with warmer waters below. "The fresher you make that surface layer, the harder it is to mix warm water up," Wilson explained. But this freshening is not fully represented in state-of-the-art climate models -- a flaw that scientists have long recognized as a major source of uncertainty in projections of future sea level rise. "The impact of glacial meltwater on ocean circulation is completely missing from most climate models," Wilson said. Reconciling global discrepancies The mismatch between observed and simulated sea surface temperatures around Antarctica is part of a larger challenge for scientists and governments seeking to prepare for climate impacts. Global climate models generally do not accurately simulate the cooling observed over the past 40 years in the Southern Ocean and the eastern Pacific around the equator or the intensity of the warming observed in the Indian and western Pacific Oceans. There is also a discrepancy between simulations and the observed frequency of La Niña weather conditions, defined by the eastern Pacific being colder than average. Warming events in the Southern Ocean over roughly the past eight years have somewhat diminished the 40-year-long cooling trend. But if sea surface temperature trends around the globe continue to resemble patterns that have emerged in recent decades, rather than shifting toward the patterns predicted in simulations, it would change scientists' expectations for some near-term impacts from climate change. "Our results may help reconcile these global discrepancies," Wilson said. Oceans globally have absorbed more than a quarter of the carbon dioxide emitted by human activities and more than 90% of the excess heat trapped in our climate system by greenhouse gases. "The Southern Ocean is one of the primary places that happens," said lead study author Zachary Kaufman, a postdoctoral scholar in Earth system science. As a result, the Southern Ocean has an outsized influence on global sea level rise, ocean heat uptake, and carbon sequestration. Its surface temperatures affect El Niño and La Niña weather patterns, which influence rainfall as far away as California. A surprising discovery To understand the physical mechanism for Southern Ocean cooling -- and enable more reliable projections of its future impacts on Earth's climate system -- Wilson and Kaufman set out to determine how much sea surface temperatures around Antarctica in simulations have cooled in response to freshening. "We naively figured it wouldn't matter exactly where you put the freshwater," Wilson said. The researchers were surprised to discover that surface temperatures are much more sensitive to freshwater fluxes concentrated along the coast than those splashing more broadly across the ocean as rain. "Applying freshwater near the Antarctic margin has a bigger influence on sea ice formation and the seasonal cycle of sea ice extent, which then has downstream impacts on sea surface temperature," Wilson said. "This was a surprising result that we are eager to explore further in future work." Quantifying the effect of missing meltwater Previous studies have sought to quantify how Antarctic meltwater affects the global climate system by adding some amount of freshwater to a single climate model simulation, in what scientists have dubbed "hosing" experiments. "You get very divergent results, because people set up their experiments slightly differently, and the models are a little different, and it's unclear if these are really apples-to-apples comparisons," Wilson explained. For the new study, the researchers sought to avoid this issue by working with a collection of simulations. Using a new ensemble of coupled climate and ocean models from the recently launched Southern Ocean Freshwater Input from Antarctica (SOFIA) Initiative, as well as an older set of models simulating ocean density and circulation changes, the authors analyzed how much simulated sea surface temperatures changed in response to the actual freshwater inputs between 1990 and 2021. "There's been some debate over whether that meltwater is enough over the historical period to really matter," said Kaufman. "We show that it does." With the new method, which incorporates simulations from 17 different climate models, the researchers found missing freshwater explains up to 60% of the mismatch in observed and predicted Southern Ocean surface temperatures between 1990 and 2021. "We've known for some time that ice sheet melting will impact ocean circulation over the next century and beyond," Wilson said. "Our results provide new evidence that these meltwater trends are already altering ocean dynamics and possibly the global climate." Additional co-authors include Yuchen Li, an undergraduate student in the Physics Department in the Stanford School of Humanities and Sciences, Ariaan Purich of Monash University, and Rebecca Beadling of Temple University. This research was supported by Stanford University, a grant from the NSF Division of Polar Programs, and the Australian Research Council Special Research Initiative for Securing Antarctica's Environmental Future. Li was supported by the Sustainability, Engineering and Science -- Undergraduate Research (SESUR) program in the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability.

This melting has implications for global climate indicators, including sea level rise, ocean warming and viability of marine ecosystems. The researchers, from the University of Melbourne and NORCE Norway Research Centre, have shown the current slowing by around 20 per cent by 2050 in a high carbon emissions scenario. This influx of fresh water into the Southern Ocean is expected to change the properties, such as density (salinity), of the ocean and its circulation patterns. University of Melbourne researchers, fluid mechanist Associate Professor Bishakhdatta Gayen and climate scientist Dr Taimoor Sohail, and oceanographer Dr Andreas Klocker from the NORCE Norwegian Research Centre, analysed a high-resolution ocean and sea ice simulation of ocean currents, heat transport and other factors to diagnose the impact of changing temperature, saltiness and wind conditions. Associate Professor Gayen said: "The ocean is extremely complex and finely balanced. If this current 'engine' breaks down, there could be severe consequences, including more climate variability, with greater extremes in certain regions, and accelerated global warming due to a reduction in the ocean's capacity to act as a carbon sink." The ACC works as a barrier to invasive species, like rafts of southern bull kelp that ride the currents, or marine-borne animals like shrimp or molluscs, from other continents reaching Antarctica. As the ACC slows and weakens, there is a higher likelihood such species will make their way onto the fragile Antarctic continent, with a potentially severe impact on the food web, which may, for example, change the available diet of Antarctic penguins. More than four times stronger than the gulf stream, the ACC is a crucial part of the world's "ocean conveyor belt," which moves water around the globe -- linking the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans -- and is the main mechanism for the exchange of heat, carbon dioxide, chemicals and biology across these ocean basins. The researchers used Australia's fastest supercomputer and climate simulator, GADI, located at Access National Research Infrastructure in Canberra. The underlying model (ACCESS-OM2-01) has been developed over a number of years by Australian researchers from various universities. The projections explored in this analysis were conducted by a research team based at UNSW, who found that the transport of ocean water from the surface to the deep may also slow in the future. Dr Sohail said it is predicted that the slow-down will be similar under the lower emissions scenario, provided ice melting accelerates as predicted in other studies. "The 2015 Paris Agreement aimed to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. Many scientists agree that we have already reached this 1.5 degree target, and it is likely to get hotter, with flow-on impacts on Antarctic ice melting," Dr Sohail said. "Concerted efforts to limit global warming (by reducing carbon emissions) will limit Antarctic ice melting, averting the projected ACC slowdown." Published in Environmental Research Letters today, the research reveals that the impact of ice melting and ocean warming on the ACC is more complex than previously thought. "The melting ice sheets dump vast quantities of fresh water into the salty ocean. This sudden change in ocean 'salinity' has a series of consequences -- including the weakening of the sinking of surface ocean water to the deep (called the Antarctic Bottom Water), and, based on this study, a weakening of the strong ocean jet that surrounds Antarctica," Associate Professor Gayen said. The new research contrasts with previous studies that suggested the ACC may be accelerating due to steeper temperature differences in different latitudes of the ocean caused by climate change, he says. "Ocean models have historically been unable to adequately resolve the small-scale processes that control current strength. This model resolves such processes, and shows a mechanism through which the ACC is projected to actually slow down in the future. However, further observational and modelling studies of this poorly-observed region are necessary to definitively discern the current's response to climate change."

Researchers from Arizona State University, along with their colleagues from the National University of the Peruvian Amazon, have identified an unknown family of microbes uniquely adapted to the waterlogged, low-oxygen conditions of tropical peatlands in Peru's northwestern Amazonian rainforest. The new research shows these microbes have a dual role in the carbon cycle and the potential to either moderate or intensify climate change. This process can either stabilize carbon for long-term storage or release it into the atmosphere as greenhouse gases, particularly CO2 and methane. Under stable conditions, these microbes enable peatlands to act as vast carbon reservoirs, sequestering carbon and reducing climate risks. However, environmental shifts, including drought and warming, can trigger their activity, accelerating global climate change. And, continued human-caused disruption of the natural peatland ecosystem could release 500 million tons of carbon by the end of the century -- roughly equivalent to 5% of the world's annual fossil fuel emissions. "The microbial universe of the Amazon peatlands is vast in space and time, has been hidden by their remote locations, and has been severely under-studied in their local and global contributions, but thanks to local partnerships, we can now visit and study these key ecosystems," says Hinsby Cadillo Quiroz, corresponding author of the new study and a researcher with the Biodesign Swette Center for Environmental Biotechnology at ASU. "Our work is finding incredible organisms adapted to this environment, and several of them provide unique and important services -- from carbon stabilization or recycling to carbon monoxide detoxification and others." Cadillo-Quiroz is also a researcher with the Biodesign Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics and the ASU School of Life Sciences. ASU colleague Michael J. Pavia is the lead author of the investigation. The study, appearing in the American Society for Microbiology journal Microbiology Spectrum , emphasizes the importance of protecting tropical peatlands to stabilize one of the planet's most significant carbon storage systems and underscores the subtle interplay between microbial life and global climate regulation. Why peatlands are crucial for climate stability The Amazonian peatlands are among the planet's largest carbon vaults, storing an estimated 3.1 billion tons of carbon in their dense, saturated soils -- roughly twice the carbon stored in all the world's forests. Peatlands are critical for global carbon storage because their waterlogged conditions slow decomposition, allowing organic material to accumulate over thousands of years. These ecosystems play a crucial role in regulating greenhouse gas emissions and influencing global climate patterns. Building on earlier research, the current study describes newly identified microbes -- part of the ancient Bathyarchaeia group that forms a complex network essential to the functioning of this ecosystem. The study highlights the remarkable abilities of these microorganisms to regulate carbon cycling in peatlands. Unlike most organisms, these microbes can thrive in extreme conditions, including environments with little to no oxygen, thanks to their metabolic flexibility. The microbes are found in the Pastaza-Marañón Foreland Basin -- a vital peatland in the northwestern Amazon rainforest of Peru. Encompassing approximately 100,000 square kilometers, the basin includes vast tracts of flooded rainforest and swamps underlain by ancient peat. These peatland microbes consume carbon monoxide -- metabolizing a gas toxic to many organisms -- and convert it into energy, simultaneously reducing carbon toxicity in the environment. By breaking down carbon compounds, they produce hydrogen and CO2 that other microbes use to generate methane. Their ability to survive both oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor conditions makes them well suited to Amazonian environments, where water levels and oxygen availability fluctuate throughout the year. However, shifts in rainfall, temperature and human activities, including deforestation and mining, are disrupting this delicate balance, causing peatlands to release greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane. Climate connection While tropical peatlands currently act as carbon sinks, absorbing more carbon than they release, they are increasingly vulnerable to climate change. Rising temperatures and altered rainfall patterns could dry out these peatlands, turning them into carbon sources. The release of billions of tons of carbon dioxide and methane from peatlands would significantly amplify global warming. The findings emphasize the urgent need to protect tropical peatlands from human activities and climate-induced stress. The researchers advocate for sustainable land management, including reducing deforestation, drainage and mining activities in peatlands to prevent disruptions. Further investigation of microbial communities is needed to better understand their roles in carbon and nutrient cycling. Tracking changes in temperature, rainfall and ecosystem dynamics is also necessary to predict future impacts on peatlands. New directions The discovery of highly adaptable peatland microbes advances our understanding of microbial diversity and underscores the resilience of life in extreme environments. These microbes represent a key piece of the puzzle in addressing global climate challenges, showing how the tiniest organisms can have an outsized impact on Earth's systems. This research, supported by the National Science Foundation, marks a significant step forward in understanding the critical role of tropical peatlands and their microbial inhabitants in global carbon cycling. As climate change continues to reshape our planet, these hidden ecosystems hold lessons that may help safeguard our future.

After years of severe drought, dozens of atmospheric rivers deluged California with record-breaking precipitation in the winter of 2022-23, burying mountain towns in snow, flooding valleys with rain and snow melt, and setting off hundreds of landslides. Following a second extremely wet winter in southern parts of the state, resulting in abundant grass and brush, 2024 brought a record-hot summer and now a record-dry start to the 2025 rainy season, along with tinder-dry vegetation that has since burned in a series of damaging wildfires. This is just the most recent example of the kind of "hydroclimate whiplash" -- rapid swings between intensely wet and dangerously dry weather -- that is increasing worldwide, according to a paper published today in Nature Reviews . "The evidence shows that hydroclimate whiplash has already increased due to global warming, and further warming will bring about even larger increases," said lead author Daniel Swain, a climate scientist with UCLA and UC Agriculture and Natural Resources. "This whiplash sequence in California has increased fire risk twofold: first, by greatly increasing the growth of flammable grass and brush in the months leading up to fire season, and then by drying it out to exceptionally high levels with the extreme dryness and warmth that followed." Global weather records show hydroclimate whiplash has swelled globally by 31% to 66% since the mid-20th century, the international team of climate researchers found -- even more than climate models suggest should have happened. Climate change means the rate of increase is speeding up. The same potentially conservative climate models project that the whiplash will more than double if global temperatures rise 3 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. The world is already poised to blast past the Paris Agreement's targeted limit of 1.5 C. The researchers synthesized hundreds of previous scientific papers for the review, layering their own analysis on top. Anthropogenic climate change is the culprit behind the accelerating whiplash, and a key driver is the "expanding atmospheric sponge" -- the growing ability of the atmosphere to evaporate, absorb and release 7% more water for every degree Celsius the planet warms, researchers said. "The problem is that the sponge grows exponentially, like compound interest in a bank," Swain said. "The rate of expansion increases with each fraction of a degree of warming." The global consequences of hydroclimate whiplash include not only floods and droughts, but the heightened danger of whipsawing between the two, including the bloom-and-burn cycle of overwatered then overdried brush, and landslides on oversaturated hillsides where recent fires removed plants with roots to knit the soil and slurp up rainfall. Every fraction of a degree of warming speeds the growing destructive power of the transitions, Swain said. Many previous studies of climate whiplash have only considered the precipitation side of the equation, and not the growing evaporative demand. The thirstier atmosphere pulls more water out of plants and soil, exacerbating drought conditions beyond simple lack of rainfall. "The expanding atmospheric sponge effect may offer a unifying explanation for some of the most visible, visceral impacts of climate change that recently seem to have accelerated," Swain said. "The planet is warming at an essentially linear pace, but in the last 5 or 10 years there has been much discussion around accelerating climate impacts. This increase in hydroclimate whiplash, via the exponentially expanding atmospheric sponge, offers a potentially compelling explanation." That acceleration, and the anticipated increase in boom-and-bust water cycles, has important implications for water management. "We can't look at just extreme rainfall or extreme droughts alone, because we have to safely manage these increasingly enormous influxes of water, while also preparing for progressively drier interludes," Swain said. "That's why 'co-management' is an important paradigm. It leads you to more holistic conclusions about which interventions and solutions are most appropriate, compared to considering drought and flood risk in isolation." In many regions, traditional management designs include shunting flood waters to flow quickly into the ocean, or slower solutions like allowing rain to percolate into the water table. However, taken alone, each option leaves cities vulnerable to the other side of climate whiplash, the researchers noted. "Hydroclimate in California is reliably unreliable," said co-author John Abatzoglou, a UC Merced climate scientist. "However, swings like we saw a couple years ago, going from one of the driest three-year periods in a century to the once-in-a-lifetime spring 2023 snowpack, both tested our water-infrastructure systems and furthered conversations about floodwater management to ensure future water security in an increasingly variable hydroclimate." Hydroclimate whiplash is projected to increase most across northern Africa, the Middle East, South Asia, northern Eurasia, the tropical Pacific and the tropical Atlantic, but most other regions will also feel the shift. "Increasing hydroclimate whiplash may turn out to be one of the more universal global changes on a warming Earth," Swain said. In California this week, although winds are fanning the extreme fires, it's the whiplash-driven lack of rain that suspended Southern California in fire season. "There's not really much evidence that climate change has increased or decreased the magnitude or likelihood of the wind events themselves in Southern California," Swain said. "But climate change is increasing the overlap between extremely dry vegetation conditions later in the season and the occurrence of these wind events. This, ultimately, is the key climate change connection to Southern California wildfires." Under a high warming scenario, California will see an increase in both the wettest and driest years and seasons by later this century. "The less warming there is, the less of an increase in hydroclimate whiplash we're going to see," Swain said. "So anything that would reduce the amount of warming from climate change will directly slow or reduce the increase in whiplash. Yet we are currently still on a path to experience between 2 degrees and 3 degrees Celsius of global warming this century -- so substantial further increases in whiplash are likely in our future, and we really need to be accounting for this in risk assessments and adaptation activities." The research was supported with funding from The Nature Conservancy of California and the Swiss National Science Foundation. Key takeaways

Global warming is causing the Ice Sheet to melt and flow more rapidly, raising sea levels and disturbing weather patterns across our planet. Because of this, precise measurements of its changing shape are of critical importance for tracking and adapting to the effects of climate warming. Scientists have now delivered the first measurements of Greenland Ice Sheet thickness change using CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2 -- the ESA and NASA ice satellite missions. Both satellites carry altimeters as their primary sensor, but they make use of different technologies to collect their measurements. CryoSat-2 carries a radar system to determine the Earth's surface height, while ICESat-2 has a laser system for the same task. Although radar signals can pass through clouds, they also penetrate into the ice sheet surface and have to be adjusted for this effect. Laser signals, on the other hand, reflect from the actual surface, but they cannot operate when clouds are present. The missions are therefore highly complementary, and combining their measurements has been a holy grail for polar science. A new study from scientists at the UK Centre for Polar Observation and Modelling (CPOM), based at Northumbria University, and published in Geophysical Research Letters shows that CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2 measurements of Greenland Ice Sheet elevation change agree to within 3%. This confirms that the satellites can be combined to produce a more reliable estimate of ice loss than either could achieve alone. It also means that if one mission were to fail, the other could be relied upon to maintain our record of polar ice change. Between 2010 and 2023, the Greenland Ice Sheet thinned by 1.2 metres on average. However, thinning across the ice sheet's margin (the ablation zone) was over five times larger, amounting to 6.4 metres on average. The most extreme thinning occurred at the ice sheets outlet glaciers, many of which are speeding up. At Sermeq Kujalleq in west central Greenland (also known as Jakobshavn Isbræ), peak thinning was 67 metres, and at Zachariae Isstrøm in the northeast peak thinning was 75 metres. Altogether, the ice sheet shrank by 2,347 cubic kilometres across the 13-year survey period -- enough to fill Africa's Lake Victoria. The biggest changes occurred in 2012 and 2019 when summer temperatures were extremely hot and the ice sheet lost more than 400 cubic kilometres of its volume each year. Greenland's ice melting also affects global ocean circulation and disturbs weather patterns. These changes have far-reaching impacts on ecosystems and communities worldwide. The availability of accurate, up-to-date data on ice sheet changes will be critical in helping us to prepare for and adapt to the impacts of climate change. Lead author and CPOM researcher Nitin Ravinder said: "We are very excited to have discovered that CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2 are in such close agreement. "Their complementary nature provides a strong motivation to combine the data sets to produce improved estimates of ice sheet volume and mass changes. "As ice sheet mass loss is a key contributor to global sea level rise, this is incredibly useful for the scientific community and policymakers." The study made use of four years of measurements from both missions, including those collected during the Cryo2ice campaign, a pioneering ESA-NASA partnership initiated in 2020. By adjusting CryoSat-2's orbit to synchronise with ICESat-2, ESA enabled the near-simultaneous collection of radar and laser data over the same regions. This alignment allows scientists to measure snow depth from space, offering unprecedented accuracy in tracking sea and land ice thickness. Tommaso Parrinello, CryoSat Mission Manager at ESA, expressed optimism about the campaign's impact: "CryoSat has provided an invaluable platform for understanding our planet's ice coverage over the past 14 years, but by aligning our data with ICESat-2, we've opened new avenues for precision and insight. "This collaboration represents an exciting step forward, not just in terms of technology but in how we can better serve scientists and policymakers who rely on our data to understand and mitigate climate impacts." Thorsten Markus, project scientist for the ICESat-2 mission at NASA, said: "It is great to see that the data from 'sister missions' are providing a consistent picture of the changes going on in Greenland. "Understanding the similarities and differences between radar and lidar ice sheet height measurements allows us to fully exploit the complementary nature of those satellite missions. "Studies like this are critical to put a comprehensive time series of the ICESat, CryoSat-2, ICESat-2, and, in the future, CRISTAL missions together." ESA's CryoSat-2 continues to be instrumental in our understanding of climate related changes in polar ice, working alongside NASA's ICESat-2 to provide robust, accurate data on ice sheet changes. Together, these missions represent a significant step forward in monitoring polar ice loss and preparing for its global consequences. CPOM is a partnership of six universities and the British Antarctic Survey (BAS), based at Northumbria University, primarily funded by the National Environment Research Council (NERC) to provide national capability in observation and modelling of the processes that occur in the Polar regions of the Earth. CPOM uses satellite observations to monitor change in the Polar regions and numerical models to better predict how their ice and oceans might evolve in the future. By providing long-term capabilities to the scientific community and leading international assessments, CPOM helps global policymakers plan for the effects of climate change and sea level rise.

The results, published Dec. 10 in Geophysical Research Letters , suggest the hottest years ahead will very likely shatter existing heat records. There is a 50% chance, the authors reported, that global warming will breach 2 degrees Celsius even if humanity meets current goals of rapidly reducing greenhouse gas emissions to net-zero by the 2050s. A number of previous studies, including the authoritative assessments by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, have concluded that decarbonization at this pace would likely keep global warming below 2 degrees. "We've been seeing accelerating impacts around the world in recent years, from heatwaves and heavy rainfall and other extremes. This study suggests that, even in the best case scenario, we are very likely to experience conditions that are more severe than what we've been dealing with recently," said Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability climate scientist Noah Diffenbaugh, who co-authored the study with Colorado State University climate scientist Elizabeth Barnes. This year is set to beat 2023 as Earth's hottest year on record, with global average temperatures expected to exceed 1.5 degrees Celsius or nearly 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit above the pre-industrial baseline, before people started burning fossil fuels widely to power industry. According to the new study, there is a nine-in-ten chance that the hottest year this century will be at least half a degree Celsius hotter even under rapid decarbonization. Using AI to refine climate projections For the new study, Diffenbaugh and Barnes trained an AI system to predict how high global temperatures could climb, depending on the pace of decarbonization. When training the AI, the researchers used temperature and greenhouse gas data from vast archives of climate model simulations. To predict future warming, however, they gave the AI the actual historical temperatures as input, along with several widely used scenarios for future greenhouse gas emissions. "AI is emerging as an incredibly powerful tool for reducing uncertainty in future projections. It learns from the many climate model simulations that already exist, but its predictions are then further refined by real-world observations," said Barnes, who is a professor of atmospheric science at Colorado State. The study adds to a growing body of research indicating that the world has almost certainly missed its chance to achieve the more ambitious goal of the 2015 Paris Climate Agreement, in which nearly 200 nations pledged to keep long-term warming "well below" 2 degrees while pursuing efforts to avoid 1.5 degrees. A second new paper from Barnes and Diffenbaugh, published Dec. 10 in Environmental Research Letters with co-author Sonia Seneviratne of ETH-Zurich, suggests many regions including South Asia, the Mediterranean, Central Europe, and parts of sub-Saharan Africa will surpass 3 degrees Celsius of warming by 2060 in a scenario in which emissions continue to increase -- sooner than anticipated in earlier studies. Extremes matter Both new studies build on 2023 research in which Diffenbaugh and Barnes predicted the years remaining until the 1.5 and 2 degrees Celsius goals are breached. But because these thresholds are based on average conditions over many years, they don't tell the full story of how extreme the climate could become. "As we watched these severe impacts year after year, we became more and more interested in predicting how extreme the climate could get even if the world is fully successful at rapidly reducing emissions," said Diffenbaugh, the Kara J Foundation Professor and Kimmelman Family Senior Fellow at Stanford. For a scenario in which emissions reach net-zero in the 2050s -- the most optimistic scenario widely used in climate modeling -- the researchers found a nine-in-ten chance that the hottest year this century will be at least 1.8 degrees Celsius hotter globally than the pre-industrial baseline, with a two-in-three chance for at least 2.1 degrees Celsius. For a scenario in which emissions decline too slowly to reach net-zero by 2100, Diffenbaugh and Barnes found a nine-in-ten chance that the hottest year will be 3 degrees Celsius hotter globally than the pre-industrial baseline. In this scenario, many regions could experience temperature anomalies at least triple what occurred in 2023. Investing in adaptation The new predictions underline the importance of investing not only in decarbonization but also in measures to make human and natural systems more resilient to severe heat, intensified drought, heavy precipitation, and other consequences of continued warming. Historically, those efforts have taken a back seat to reducing carbon emissions, with decarbonization investments outstripping adaptation spending in global climate finance and policies such as the 2022 Inflation Reduction Act. "Our results suggest that even if all the effort and investment in decarbonization is as successful as possible, there is a real risk that, without commensurate investments in adaptation, people and ecosystems will be exposed to climate conditions that are much more extreme than what they are currently prepared for," Diffenbaugh said.

Some models which scientists use to predict future changes in Earth's climate show faster global warming than others, leading to temperature projections that are considered unlikely. Some experts suggest that these more sensitive (or 'hotter') models should be omitted when studying future climate impacts. New research published in Earth's Future shows no clear correlation between the rate of warming and some important regional drivers. Instead, how the behaviour of regional weather patterns control impacts needs to be considered too. Dr Ranjini Swaminathan, lead author at the University of Reading and National Centre for Earth Observation, said: "We should not exclude climate models from impact assessments based on their climate sensitivity as this could lead to ignoring future outcomes that are potentially serious and realistic. "What happens globally doesn't always match what happens locally and we show that no universal correlation exists between climate sensitivity and regional climate drivers. For example, we see a general increase in the number of drought events in the future, but we don't see a statistically significant correlation between the change in the number of drought events and climate sensitivity. This is because the magnitude of global warming is just one of many factors influencing drought and is often not the most important. "Our results contradict suggestions that models showing higher warming should be excluded from studies about future climate impacts." Preparing communities The researchers studied how different models predict three major climate impacts: heavy rains that cause flooding, droughts that affect farming and water supplies, and conditions that increase the risk of wildfire. They looked at these across different parts of the world, including the Amazon rainforest, Australia, East Asia, and parts of Africa and India. They discovered that how much global warming a model predicts isn't the main factor in determining local impacts -- regional factors matter too. If models are selected based only upon their prediction of global warming, important and physically plausible outcomes of regional climate impacts could be missed. This could lead to an inaccurate portrayal of the risks that need to be considered by governments and communities as they adapt to climate change.

Greenland's glaciers are melting at an alarming rate. Two recent studies, one coordinated by the University of Liège and published in Geophysical Research Letters, the other published in a scientific press release, reveal the scale of the problem. Three regional climate models (RACMO, MAR and HIRHAM) offer varying predictions for the melting of the ice, but all agree on one conclusion: Greenland will lose a massive amount of ice by 2100, accelerating the rise in sea levels. According to the projections, the ice sheet could lose between 964 and 1735 gigatonnes of ice per year by the end of the century, depending on the model used," explains Quentin Glaude, an engineer at the Montefiore Insitute at ULiège. These differences, although significant, do not hide the essential fact: the melting of the ice is an irreversible process if greenhouse gas emissions are not drastically reduced." The research team pointed out that these differences stem from the way in which each model treats the flow of meltwater. For example, when snow melts, some of the water infiltrates and refreezes, while the rest flows directly into the ocean. This complex process, influenced by feedbacks linked to albedo (surface reflectivity), is a key factor in the discrepancies between the models. "Greenland currently contributes 25% to global sea level rise, or 0.6 mm per year. If the current melting continues, this contribution could reach up to 1 metre by 2100," adds Xavier Fettweis, climatologist at ULiège. This would put millions of lives at risk in coastal areas around the world, exposed to increased risks of flooding and submersion." The research results that have just been published were made possible by the Walloon region's high-performance computing infrastructure, in particular the NIC5 supercomputer at the University of Liège. These tools make it possible to explore complex climate scenarios by simulating the interactions between ice, the atmosphere and the oceans. Towards even more accurate models Despite their advances, the researchers insist on the need to improve the climate models. A better understanding of the processes involved in retaining water in the snow and the integration of dynamic parameters, such as changes in the altitude of the ice sheet, are essential to reduce uncertainties. This work, the fruit of collaboration between European institutions, illustrates the importance of cooperation in the face of global climate challenges. The results obtained will be incorporated into future IPCC assessments, helping to refine projections of sea-level rise. The melting of the Greenland ice sheet is a wake-up call that cannot be ignored. It calls for immediate action to limit global warming, protect vulnerable communities and preserve the world's ecosystems.

All this may not be breaking news to everyone, but amid this upward march in average temperatures, a striking new phenomenon is emerging: distinct regions are seeing repeated heat waves that are so extreme, they fall far beyond what any model of global warming can predict or explain. A new study provides the first worldwide map of such regions, which show up on every continent except Antarctica like giant, angry skin blotches. In recent years these heat waves have killed tens of thousands of people, withered crops and forests, and sparked devastating wildfires. "The large and unexpected margins by which recent regional-scale extremes have broken earlier records have raised questions about the degree to which climate models can provide adequate estimates of relations between global mean temperature changes and regional climate risks," says the study. "This is about extreme trends that are the outcome of physical interactions we might not completely understand," said lead author Kai Kornhuber, an adjunct scientist at the Columbia Climate School's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. "These regions become temporary hothouses." Kornhuber is also a senior research scholar at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis in Austria. The study was just published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . The study looks at heat waves over the past 65 years, identifying areas where extreme heat is accelerating considerably faster than more moderate temperatures. This often results in maximum temperatures that have been repeatedly broken by outsize, sometimes astonishing, amounts. For instance, a nine-day wave that hammered the U.S. Pacific Northwest and southwestern Canada in June 2021 broke daily records in some locales by 30 degrees C, or 54 F. This included the highest ever temperature recorded in Canada, 121.3 F, in Lytton, British Columbia. The town burned to the ground the next day in a wildfire driven in large part by the drying of vegetation in the extraordinary heat. In Oregon and Washington state, hundreds of people died from heat stroke and other health conditions. These extreme heat waves have been hitting predominantly in the last five years or so, though some occurred in the early 2000s or before. The most hard-hit regions include populous central China, Japan, Korea, the Arabian peninsula, eastern Australia and scattered parts of Africa. Others include Canada's Northwest Territories and its High Arctic islands, northern Greenland, the southern end of South America and scattered patches of Siberia. Areas of Texas and New Mexico appear on the map, though they are not at the most extreme end. According to the report, the most intense and consistent signal comes from northwestern Europe, where sequences of heat waves contributed to some 60,000 deaths in 2022 and 47,000 deaths in 2023. These occurred across Germany, France, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and other countries. Here, in recent years, the hottest days of the year are warming twice as fast the summer mean temperatures. The region is especially vulnerable in part because, unlike places like the United States, few people have air conditioning, because traditionally it was almost never needed. The outbreaks have continued; as recently as this September, new maximum temperature records were set in Austria, France, Hungary, Slovenia, Norway and Sweden. The researchers call the statistical trends "tail-widening" that is, the anomalous occurrence of temperatures at the far upper end, or beyond, anything that would be expected with simple upward shifts in mean summer temperatures. But the phenomenon is not happening everywhere; the study shows that maximum temperatures across many other regions are actually lower than what models would predict. These include wide areas of the north-central United States and south-central Canada, interior parts of South America, much of Siberia, northern Africa and northern Australia. Heat is increasing in these regions as well, but the extremes are increasing at similar or lower speed than what changes in average would suggest. Climbing overall temperatures make heat waves more likely in many cases, but the causes of the extreme heat outbreaks are not entirely clear. In Europe and Russia, an earlier study led by Kornhuber blamed heat waves and droughts on wobbles in the jet stream, a fast-moving river of air that continuously circles the northern hemisphere. Hemmed in by historically frigid temperatures in the far north and much warmer ones further south, the jet stream generally confines itself to a narrow band. But the Arctic is warming on average far more quickly than most other parts of the Earth, and this appears to be destabilizing the jet stream, causing it to develop so-called Rossby waves, which suck hot air from the south and park it in temperate regions that normally do not see extreme heat for days or weeks at a time. This is only one hypothesis, and it does not seem to explain all the extremes. A study of the fatal 2021 Pacific Northwest/southwestern Canada heat wave led by Lamont-Doherty graduate student Samuel Bartusek (also a coauthor on the latest paper) identified a confluence of factors. Some seemed connected to long-term climate change, others to chance. The study identified a disruption in the jet stream similar to the Rossby waves thought to affect Europe and Russia. It also found that decades of slowly rising temperatures had been drying out regional vegetation, so that when a spell of hot weather came along, plants had fewer reserves of water to evaporate into the air, a process that helps moderate heat. A third factor: a series of smaller-scale atmospheric waves that gathered heat from the Pacific Ocean surface and transported it eastward onto land. Like Europe, few people in this region have air conditioning, because it is generally not needed, and this probably upped the death toll. The heat wave "was so extreme, it's tempting to apply the label of a 'black swan' event, one that can't be predicted," said Bartusek. "But there's a boundary between the totally unpredictable, the plausible and the totally expected that's hard to categorize. I would call this more of a grey swan." While the wealthy United States is better prepared than many other places, excessive heat nevertheless kills more people than all other weather-related causes combined, including hurricanes, tornadoes and floods. According to a study out this past August, the yearly death rate has more than doubled since 1999, with 2,325 heat-related deaths in 2023. This has recently led to calls for heat waves to be named, similar to hurricanes, in order to heighten public awareness and motivate governments to prepare. "Due to their unprecedented nature, these heat waves are usually linked to very severe health impacts, and can be disastrous for agriculture,vegetation and infrastructure," said Kornhuber. "We're not built for them, and we might not be able to adapt fast enough." The study was also coauthored by Richard Seager and Mingfang Ting of Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, and H.J. Schellnhuber of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis.

The research, led by the University of Bristol, showed on average nearly one in five people (20%) in Small Island Developing States (SIDS) -- totalling some 8.5million -- are now exposed to coastal and inland flooding. For three of the 57 countries concentrated in the Pacific, Caribbean, Indian Ocean, and South China Sea, namely the Bahamas, Guyana, and Tuvalu, this proportion trebles to more than 60% of the population, according to the findings. Amidst record-breaking rainfall and catastrophic scenes in Valencia, Spain, the findings further highlight the severe risk of flooding for people in all parts of the world. Lead author Leanne Archer, Research Associate at the University's Cabot Institute for the Environment, said: "Flooding is now an alarming real-world threat for so many people globally. This study demonstrates that the often-overlooked Small Island Developing States are already subject to a disproportionate level of flood exposure, despite contributing the least to climate change." Projections also showed that in future, even in the least-worst global warming scenario considered, the number of people affected by rising sea levels, storm surge and extreme rainfall events, including tropical cyclones, will significantly grow. For comparison, the scale of people likely to be affected dwarfs the level of flood exposure in developed nations such as the US and UK, where around 13% and 8% of the population are impacted respectively. Leanne said: "The findings should be a call to action to support these nations in adapting to and mitigating against these extreme repercussions, even under the lowest emissions scenario, which put life and livelihoods in peril." SIDS are group of island nations and territories, with smaller populations ranging from around 1000 to 7,000,000 people, identified by the United Nations (UN) as being especially exposed to the effects of climate change. Coastal flooding is a major driver of flood risk as the populations are often most concentrated along coastlines. But findings showed inland flooding is in fact a huge issue for SIDS, accounting for the vast majority of overall population exposure at 81%. Leanne, who conducted the research for her PhD in flood risk, said: "Previous studies have only focused on coastal flooding, representing a significant underestimation of exposure. This is also the very first time a comprehensive picture of flood risk has been mapped across all 57 Small Island Developing States because the populations are so small, they haven't met the minimum catchment size of previous major global studies. "The modelling provides striking evidence demonstrating that climate change has an unjust and unequitable impact on the places and people, who have contributed least to the greenhouse gas emissions, fuelling the problem." Climate change is compounding the risk of flooding across SIDS by increasing the magnitude of many factors, including rainfall, river flow, extreme wave heights and water levels, storm surges, and sea level rise. Even if global warming is limited to a 1.5 degrees Celsius increase by 2100, findings project more than a fifth (21%) of SIDS populations will be exposed to flooding. In a worst case scenario of more than 4 degrees Celsius warming this figure could rise to nearly a quarter (23%), according to the study. A UN report last month warned the world faces as much as 3.1 degrees Celsius warming if governments do not take more action to reduce carbon emissions. Irrespective of how much the world warms, countries anticipated to be at most risk remained the same in the projections, including Belize, Turks and Caicos Islands, and the Maldives. The study, in partnership with the University of Southampton, used water risk intelligence firm Fathom's Global Flood Map; a high-resolution global hydrodynamic flood model combined with worldwide population datasets. Co-author Paul Bates, Professor of Hydrology at the University of Bristol and Co-founder of Fathom, said: "This study fills an important gap in research, including direct measures of flood hazard and exposure which are essential to adequately reduce loss and damage from flooding in the Small Island Developing States. "The results are a timely warning to the world's political leaders and policy makers that global commitments to significantly reduce carbon emissions must be backed up by action, in order to reduce potential loss and damage from flooding in Small Island Developing States, which contribute least to harmful carbon emissions." Finding bold answers to big questions concerning global challenges is at the heart of the University of Bristol's research. This study cuts across core themes, including net zero and climate change and social justice, and the Cabot Institute has a strong focus on tackling pressing environmental change, natural hazards and disaster risk.

The report, facilitated by the American Geophysical Union (AGU) and advised by a global panel of experts, says any research into large-scale interventions in Earth's climate system must be grounded in sound ethical principles so society can make informed choices about whether to deploy them. It warns that the unintended consequences of large-scale deployment are largely unknown. "Climate change requires immediate action, and our most urgent, non-negotiable priority must be to tackle the root cause, carbon emissions," said AGU President Lisa J. Graumlich. "But as pressure grows to supplement emissions reductions with active, large-scale intervention in Earth's climate system, we must ensure that research is done in ways that are inclusive, representative and just, carefully considering risks and benefits." "We all live on this one planet, but solutions cannot be one size fits all," said Carlos Nobre, a senior researcher at the Institute for Advanced Studies in São Paulo, Brazil, and member of the Ethical Framework Advisory Board. "Global communities have unique challenges and vulnerabilities. When we contemplate how to address the existential threat of climate change, it is imperative that we do so by centering ethics. This framework helps lay the foundation for effective collaboration and partnership." The report, Ethical Framework Principles for Climate Intervention Research ,seeks to establish a set of globally recognized ethical principles to guide research, funding and policy proposals, drawing on precedents developed to guide research around other emerging fields with unknown consequences, including ethical practices for biomedical research and genetic engineering. In the 2015 UN Paris Agreement, the world's nations pledged to pursue efforts to limit global temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius. However, global emissions are still increasing, and every additional fraction of a degree will see more severe storms, floods, heatwaves and other climate impacts and increase the risk of triggering catastrophic tipping points such as the Amazon rainforest transforming into dry savannah or the collapse of the Greenland Ice Sheet. Climate interventions, also known as geo-engineering or climate engineering, are deliberate, large-scale attempts to alter the climate system in a way that halts, slows down or reverses global warming. Climate intervention technologies and methods include: carbon dioxide removal, which aims to remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere and store them, using approaches such as reforestation or increasing the ocean's capacity to absorb carbon; solar radiation modification, which aims to reduce the amount of solar radiation absorbed by Earth, such as approaches that increase the amount of sunlight reflected from clouds or space sunshades; and emerging technologies and research, including those aiming to preserve ice sheets and restore sea ice and permafrost. "Climate intervention must not replace greenhouse gas emissions reduction," said AGU Interim Executive Director and CEO Janice R. Lachance. "Yet there is robust discussion and debate on whether it should become part of a comprehensive strategy to slow warming, address legacy carbon emitted over the last century and get us back on track with global temperature targets. It is AGU's privilege and responsibility as a leader in climate science to advocate for responsible pursuit of knowledge." The framework has been developed over a two-year period, under the guidance of an advisory board of more than 40 international experts from a wide range of disciplines, with extensive public consultation worldwide. It reflects contributions from hundreds of scientists, policymakers, ethicists, government agencies, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and communities that could be disproportionately affected by climate change interventions. It proposes that all new research plans, funding decisions and policy proposals should meet five key principles: Responsible Research. Climate intervention research should not be presented as an alternative to emissions reductions. Researchers should provide a clear, public justification of their activity. They should not only assess its direct risks but also the physical, environmental and social consequences if it were scaled. Holistic Climate Justice. Before starting an activity, researchers should consider whether it would shift climate impacts from one group to another, as well as consider its impact on groups experiencing social, economic, climate and environmental injustices, on future generations, and on nature and biodiversity. Inclusive Public Participation. Researchers should have fair and inclusive processes to identify groups that may be impacted by the activity and include them in discussion of the purposes and design of the research. They should secure the free, prior and informed consent of any Indigenous Peoples likely to be affected. Transparency. Public and private funding of climate intervention research and experimentation should be completely transparent. Researchers should handle data responsibly, report on the nature of the science involved and document the decision-making process from start to finish. They should clearly report any negative results. Informed Governance. Where technologies have significant risks, funders should require research proposals to be reviewed and approved by an independent body. Activities with higher risks or at larger scales should have greater scrutiny. Researchers should be accountable to a representative set of public institutions and stakeholders at scales relevant to the impact of the research. "Communities need to be heard on decisions that affect them, " saidproject lead Billy Williams, AGU's Executive Vice President, Diversity, Equity and Inclusion."Though climate change is a risk shared by all Earth's people, the weight of climate consequences is not carried equally. As we consider technology to counteract warming, it is essential that we do not add to that unequal burden." The framework applies to all types of climate intervention and covers lab research and computer modeling as well as activities undertaken in the field. It is designed to be flexible enough to be adapted to the needs of diverse contexts and actors and capable of evolving as society's understanding of climate risks and climate intervention technologies develops. AGU intends for the framework to drive discussion within the broader community involved in and affected by climate intervention research, policy and investment and prompt the development of norms for ethical and responsible research practices. "AGU and the contributors of this work strongly encourage all relevant actors, including researchers, funders and policymakers, to embrace these ethical principles when considering or undertaking activities relating to climate intervention research," says the report. Further information on the report: https://www.agu.org/ethicalframeworkprinciples

The study, published today in Science and co-led by the University of Bristol and China University of Geosciences (Wuhan), has shed new light on why the effects of rapid climate change in the Permian-Triassic warming were so devastating for all forms of life in the sea and on land. Scientists have long linked this mass extinction to vast volcanic eruptions in what is now Siberia. The resulting carbon dioxide emissions rapidly accelerated climate warming, resulting in widespread stagnation and the collapse of marine and terrestrial ecosystems. But what caused life on land, including plants and usually resilient insects, to suffer just as badly has remained a source of mystery. Co-lead author Dr Alexander Farnsworth, Senior Research Associate at the University of Bristol, said: “Climate warming alone cannot drive such devastating extinctions because, as we are seeing today, when the tropics become too hot, species migrate to the cooler, higher latitudes. Our research has revealed that increased greenhouse gases don’t just make the majority of the planet warmer, they also increase weather and climate variability making it even more ‘wild’ and difficult for life to survive.” The Permian-Triassic catastrophe shows the problem of global warming is not just a matter of it becoming unbearably hot, but also a case of conditions swinging wildly over decades. “Most life failed to adapt to these conditions, but thankfully a few things survived, without which we wouldn’t be here today. It was nearly, but not quite, the end of the life on Earth,” said co-lead author Professor Yadong Sun at China University of Geosciences, Wuhan . The scale of Permian-Triassic warming was revealed by studying oxygen isotopes in the fossilised tooth material of tiny extinct swimming organisms called conodonts. By studying the temperature record of conodonts from around the world, the researchers were able to show a remarkable collapse of temperature gradients in the low and mid latitudes. Dr Farnsworth, who used pioneering climate modelling to evaluate the findings, said: “Essentially, it got too hot everywhere. The changes responsible for the climate patterns identified were profound because there were much more intense and prolonged El Niño events than witnessed today. Species were simply not equipped to adapt or evolve quickly enough.” In recent years El Niño events have caused major changes in rainfall patterns and temperature. For example, the weather extremes that caused the June 2024 North American heatwave when temperatures were around 15°C hotter than normal. 2023-2024 was also one of the hottest years on record globally due to a strong El Niño in the Pacific, which was further exacerbated by increased human-induced CO 2 driving catastrophic drought and fires around the world. “Fortunately such events so far have only lasted one to two years at a time. During the Permian-Triassic crisis, El Niño persisted for much longer resulting in a decade of widespread drought, followed by years of flooding. Basically, the climate was all over the place and that makes it very hard for any species to adapt,” co-author Paul Wignall, Professor of Palaeoenvironments at the University of Leeds. The results of the climate modelling also help explain the abundant charcoal found in rock layers of that age. “Wildfires become very common if you have a drought-prone climate. Earth got stuck in a crisis state where the land was burning and the oceans stagnating. There was nowhere to hide,” added co-author Professor David Bond, a palaeontologist at the University of Hull. The researchers observed that throughout Earth’s history there have been many volcanic events similar to those in Siberia, and many caused extinctions, but none led to a crisis of the scale of the Permian-Triassic event. They found Permian-Triassic extinction was so different because these Mega-El Niños created positive feedback on the climate which led to incredibly warm conditions starting in the tropics and then beyond, resulting in the dieback of vegetation. Plants are essential for removing CO 2 from the atmosphere, as well as the foundation of the food web, and if they die so does one of the Earth's mechanisms to stop CO 2 building up in the atmosphere as a result of continued volcanism. This also helps explain the conundrum regarding the Permian-Triassic mass extinction whereby the extinction on land occurred tens of thousands of years before extinction in the oceans. “Whilst the oceans were initially shielded from the temperature rises, the mega-El Nino’s caused temperatures on land to exceed most species thermal tolerances at rates so rapid that they could not adapt in time,” explained Dr Sun. “Only species that could migrate quickly could survive, and there weren’t many plants or animals that could do that.” Mass extinctions, although rare, are the heartbeat of the Earth’s natural system resetting life and evolution along different paths. “The Permo-Triassic mass extinction, although devastating, would ultimately see the rise of Dinosaurs becoming the dominant species thereafter as would the Cretaceous mass extinction lead to the rise of mammals, and humans,” Dr Farnsworth concluded.

Led by scientists from the CICERO Center for International Climate Research and supported by the University of Reading, the research shows that 20 per cent of the population could face extreme weather risks if emissions are cut enough to reach the aims of the Paris Agreement, compared to 70% if limited action is taken. The new paper, published in the journal Nature Geoscience, shows how global warming can combine with normal variations in the weather, to produce decade-long periods of very rapid changes in both extreme temperatures and rainfall. Few studies have explored the impact extreme weather will have on different countries. Dr Carley Iles, lead author of the research at CICERO, said: “We focus on regional changes, due to their increased relevance to the experience of people and ecosystems compared with the global mean, and identify regions projected to experience substantial changes in rates of one or more extreme event indices over the coming decades.” Unprecedented conditions Large climate model simulations were used in the study to show that large parts of the tropics and subtropics, encompassing 70 percent of current population, are expected to experience strong joint rates of change in temperature and precipitation extremes combined over the next 20 years, under a high-emissions scenario. With strong emissions mitigation, the number is expected to drop to 20 percent, or around 1.5 billion people. Rapid changes increase the risk of unprecedented conditions and extreme events that currently account for a disproportionate share of the realised impacts of climate change. For example, heatwaves may cause heat stress and excess mortality of both people and livestock, stress to ecosystems, reduced agricultural yields, difficulties in cooling power plants, and transport disruption. Similarly, precipitation extremes can lead to flooding and damage to settlements, infrastructure, crops and ecosystems, increased erosion and reduced water quality. Thus, society seems particularly vulnerable to high rates of change of extremes, especially when multiple hazards increase at once. Clean-up risks Dr Laura Wilcox, co-author at the University of Reading, said: “We also find that rapid clean-up of air pollution, mostly over Asia, leads to accelerated co-located increases in warm extremes and influences the Asian summer monsoons. While cleaning the air is critical for health reasons, air pollution has also masked some of the effects of global warming. Now, the necessary cleanup may combine with global warming and give very strong changes in extreme conditions over the coming decades.” While the new paper focuses on the likelihood of rapid change, the authors emphasise that the results have important implications for climate adaptation. “In the best case, we calculate that rapid changes will affect 1.5 billion people. The only way to deal with this is to prepare for a situation with a much higher likelihood of unprecedented extreme events, already in the next 1-2 decades”, says Dr. Bjørn H. Samset at CICERO Center for International Climate Research. Samset has contributed to the newly published study.

The research, published in Nature Communications , was published almost a year after the deadly flood happened on the September 10, 2023. The co-authors believe that their work sheds light on the alarming vulnerability that arid areas face given the rising frequency of extreme weather events due to climate change and the urgent need for advanced earth observations programs to monitor and characterize these areas. Over the past decade, the North African Sahara, an area larger than the continental United States, has faced a dangerous combination of conditions; increasingly arid conditions which are interrupted by intense, coastal rainstorms. The source of such changes are as follows: increasing desertification has led to intensified droughts, and rainstorms in the region have increased in frequency due to the rising seawater temperature in the Eastern Mediterranean because of global warming. The paper's corresponding author, Essam Heggy, who is a research scientist in the Microwave Systems, Sensors, and Imaging Lab (MiXIL) within the Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and a co-principal investigator at the USC Viterbi Center for Arid and Water Research Exploration (AWARE), says that together, these two extreme conditions are increasing soil erosion and generating deadly mud flows that are hard to control with the aging dams that exist in the area. While some scholars believe that that droughts are the Sahara's deadliest threat, Heggy warns this is not the case. His collaborating paper,"Assessing flash flood erosion following Storm Daniel in Libya," he says, provides the evidence. A year ago, in the Fall 2023, Storm Daniel also known as "Medicane Daniel" struck the eastern coast of Libya, causing unprecedented flash floods with a death toll of more than 11,300 people and large-scale infrastructure damages. (It has been suggested by the Yale Climate Connections that have flash floods of this nature have not been observed on the continent in over 100 years.) The authors explain that Africa's deadliest flood in a century, which occurred in the desert, happened due to a combination of factors: unusually high precipitation, collapses in two flood control dams, and the failure of the city's "blue" or water infrastructure to regulate this extreme event. They suggest that sediment loading, resulting from surface erosion, increased the density of flowing water and exacerbated the catastrophic impact of the flash floods in the coastal cities of Derna and Susah, where 66% of Derna's, and 48% of Susah's urban surfaces experienced moderate-to-high damages. Using a series of Sentinel-1A C-band orbital Synthetic Aperture Radar images, the researchers measured the changes in the returned signal coherence, which informed the changes in surface textural properties before and after the storm's occurrence. (These differences serve as a proxy for mapping flood erosion and assessing infrastructure damages.) The researchers demonstrate that the flow within the streams was heavily loaded and thickened with eroded soils which increased the flow's destructive nature. This, in turn, contributed to the failure of two dams that were supposed to protect the city and residents of Derna. Existing runoff flow models are valuable for estimating flood extents, says Heggy. However, he says they fall short of assessing surface erosion in deserts, which can have a devastating impact, as seen in Derna. Radar satellites, Heggy says, overcome this limitation. "Improving the monitoring of arid watersheds using advanced radar satellites will be crucial for mitigating these devastating risks across several parts of the Sahara, Arabian Peninsula, and other deserts." Jonathan Normand, a visiting graduate student at the USC AWARE Center and the first author of the paper says, "Today, you can post on social media from the middle of a desert thanks to the hundreds of communication satellites now orbiting Earth. Yet, researchers are still left with a limited number of satellites to grasp the complexities of Earth's dynamics and surface processes in deserts." "The sequence of events that happened in Libya is one that can happen in many populous areas across North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula," warns Heggy and colleagues in a parallel study carried out with researchers from Morocco and Spain. There are also added risk factors, notes Heggy: Storms are getting stronger, and cities are getting more populous and less organized in terms of policies to reduce development and increase disaster preparedness. "The deadly floods of Derna's shows that regional policymakers in the Middle East and North Africa are not yet sufficiently listening to science, although the last two climate change conferences were hosted in the region. The deadliest enemy ahead is our own belief that these extremes are punctual events that will not repeat. Climate models tell us that they will hit back even stronger."

Tidal wetlands are extremely important environmentally, not only for the role of their ecosystems in conserving biodiversity, or the protection of erosion and promotions of fishing activity, but also because they contribute to the elimination of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and slow down the decomposition of organic material in soils which are humid and poor in oxygen. However, these conditions also promote the release of methane, a greenhouse gas that is significantly more powerful than carbon dioxide and have more potential to trap heat in the atmosphere. The effect of methane emissions counteract the effect of carbon dioxide sequestration so determining and predicting methane gas emissions in tidal wetlands with precision is essential for assessing the climate implications of the restoration or degradation of these natural environments. A study led by a Ariane Arias-Ortiz of the UAB Department of Physics, and member of the Marine and Environmental Biogeosciences research group of ICTA-UAB, has analysed the data for methane fluxes in 109 tidal wetlands in the USA, focussing on factors such as climate, vegetation and the chemical composition of water trapped in the sediment. This is the first time that a such a large set o data on these emissions, together with a broad range of environmental and biogeochemical parameters has been made available to the entire scientific community in a standardised manner. The research has identified important spatial and temporal predictors in the methane emissions which have interactive effects among the environmental variables documented for the first time. It was observed that salinity is a dominant factor: the more saline wetlands emitted low levels of methane while more freshwater marshes presented variable emissions. In the freshwater marshes, the warmer ones emitted more methane while in wetlands situated above the flood plain (less flooded) emitted less. The study also showed that seasonal variations in methane emissions in the same ecosystem depend to a large extent on temperature -- the higher the temperature the greater the level of emission -- and the fixation of plant carbon and photosynthesis. Unlike inland wetlands, the tidal marshes show significant variation in methane emission on a daily basis, influenced by plant activity which can improve root exudation during active photosynthesis, stimulating methane-producing microbes or facilitating their transport through cavities in the plant tissue. Additionally, in zones with significant tidal activity the highest level emissions are produced as intermittent releases of stored gas after every low tide. Using data from the study we the models for predicting and facilitating the simulation of methane gas in tidal wetlands in a changing climate can be improved. "Methane emissions have a great impact and their variability in tidal wetlands presents challenges when it comes to determining the proportion of greenhouse gases produced by these ecosystems. Predicting methane emissions is important for achieving environmental objectives and improving climate models" explains Ariane. "With this study we can offer data and methods for improving estimates of methane emissions in tidal wetlands and we can perfect national and global greenhouse gas inventories." In the last decade there has been growing interest in restoring coastal wetlands to mitigate climate change. The tidal marshes can sequestrate more carbon dioxide per soil surface unit than other ecosystems such as terrestrial forests. Ariane stresses that this means "the implications of the research are significant for improving the precision of methane emission predictions in tidal wetlands and making a careful evaluation of how the restoration of these ecosystems can help to mitigate climate change." The research offers practical directives for estimating whether methane emission in a specific marsh are, or could be in the future, significant enough to be included in the greenhouse gas inventories in projects aiming to mitigate emissions. The study facilitates "more refined estimates of methane fluxes in thee ecosystems than the global values provided by the IPCC" she explains. Understanding the mechanisms that produce the emission we have observed "is crucial for estimating the precision of methane emissions in future climate scenarios, especially because the tidal wetlands are faced with the growing pressures of human activity and the effects of climate change such as increasing sea levels and global warming," she concludes.

Researchers from the University of Southampton, the Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, the National Oceanography Centre and Stockholm University analysed ocean data from 1979 to 2021 to better understand how the mixing of Atlantic and Arctic waters helps to maintain the AMOC. The AMOC acts like a giant ocean conveyor belt moving warm water from the tropics north and cold water south, distributing heat around the planet. It helps to keep Northern Europe, including the UK, relatively mild compared to other regions at similar latitudes. The study published in Nature Communications found that the lower limb of the AMOC -- the part of this 'conveyor belt' consisting of deep, cold, dense water flowing southward in the Atlantic Ocean -- is composed of 72 per cent Atlantic waters and 28 per cent Arctic waters. "As the warm water reaches the cooler regions of the North Atlantic, it loses heat to the atmosphere, becomes denser, and sinks to great depths," explains Dr Dipanjan Dey, lead author of the paper from the, who undertook the research as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Southampton. "We found that while some of this dense water immediately returns south, much of it travels northward, where it mixes with colder, fresher Arctic waters in regions like the Denmark Strait, between Iceland and Greenland. This mixing process makes the waters even denser before they too flow southward, contributing to the AMOC's strength." The researchers estimate that the mixing of Atlantic and Arctic waters is responsible for 33 per cent of the transformation of warm, salty, water into colder, fresher and denser water, with 67 per cent attributed to interactions between the ocean and the atmosphere. The study challenges previous assumptions that focused mainly on heat loss in specific areas without accounting for the critical role of Atlantic-Arctic water mixing. Models predict that the AMOC could slow down as the planet warms due to climate change. A weaker, shallower AMOC circulation, as happened during the last Ice Age, has major consequences for global climate patterns. The new insights into the role of the mixing of Atlantic and Arctic waters help us to better understand these processes. Professor Robert Marsh, a coauthor on the paper from the University of Southampton, explains: "As the ocean surface warms and becomes fresher, the resulting increase in stratification (layering of water) hinders this crucial mixing between Atlantic and Arctic waters. This reduced mixing weakens the AMOC by decreasing the density and depth of its southward flow, potentially leading to an overall slowdown of the circulation. "A slowdown in circulation of the AMOC would have major consequences, from much colder temperatures in Northern Europe to sea level rises along the eastern coast of the United States. If it weakens significantly there could be abrupt, dramatic, and potentially irreversible changes to our planet's climate." A weaker, shallower AMOC could also shorten the time carbon dioxide stays in the ocean before being released back into the atmosphere, potentially accelerating climate change and its impacts. "Climate models need to accurately represent these water mixing processes to better predict future climate scenarios," says Dr Dey. "Our study highlights the complex interplay between our climate and global ocean circulation processes. We need to urgently address global warming to avoid crossed potential tipping points where the circulation could slow down significantly, or even collapse."

Global warming, driven by human activities, has led to rising average temperatures worldwide. However, Greenland has been warming at an even faster rate than the rest of the world, leading to accelerated ice sheet melting. This intensified warming in the northern regions, known as Arctic Amplification, has the potential to raise sea levels significantly, posing a threat to coastal areas and ecosystems globally. Understanding the drivers behind this phenomenon is crucial for predicting future climate impacts. Studies have previously attributed Arctic Amplification to local climate feedback processes, heat release from the Arctic Ocean, and energy transport from the south. Melting sea ice during summers further amplifies warming trends through a process known as surface albedo feedback, where less ice leads to less sunlight being reflected into space. Additionally, the Greenland blocking index -- a climate mode indicating the strength of high-pressure blocking conditions over Greenland -- has been linked to temperature trends in the region. However, past studies have primarily focused on overall warming trends, often overlooking the specific causes of extreme year-to-year temperature events and relying mainly on energy balance models. To address these gaps, a team of researchers from Korea, led by Professor Kyung-Ja Ha, from the Department of Climate System at Pusan National University, including Manuel Tobias Blau, also from Pusan National University, and Dr. Eui-Seok Chung from the Division of Atmospheric Sciences at Korea Polar Research Institute, investigated the anomalous warming trends in Greenland from 1979 to 2021. "In this study, we focused on the year-to-year perturbations of the surface energy budget to explain Greenland's extreme temperature," explains Prof. Ha. Their study was published in the journal Communications Earth & Environment on July 28, 2024. The researchers employed a surface energy budget framework, which separates the contributions of radiative and non-radiative sources, to analyze temperature anomaly events over Greenland. Their findings revealed that increases in clear-sky downwelling longwave radiation -- the heat radiated by the atmosphere to the surface on clear-sky days -- and the resulting surface albedo feedback were the dominant factors in Greenland's surface warming. The researchers also investigated the mechanism for this increase in clear-sky radiation and found an increase in atmospheric temperature as the primary driver. Specifically, in warm years, the combination of increased surface temperatures and tropospheric warming led to turbulent heat exchange between the atmosphere and the surface. This process also enhanced moisture transport from the south to Greenland and contributed to the formation of a high-pressure system, resembling a blocking anticyclone, which trapped and sustained warm conditions. These dynamics resulted in intense ice melting, creating a feedback loop that further amplified the warming effects. Moreover, different modes of natural climate variability, particularly those related to the blocking index, can either amplify or moderate these warming trends, leading to extreme temperature events. "The results suggest a significant impact of natural variability in explaining the atmospheric anomalies leading to extreme summers over Greenland," says Prof. Ha. Highlighting the importance of the study, she adds, "Considering climate change, the extreme summer temperature over Greenland will further accelerate the ice sheet melting, leading to a rapid sea level rise." By shedding light on the drivers of Greenland's extreme summer temperatures, this study offers crucial insights that could help project the future development of the Greenland ice sheet and inform strategies to prevent further degradation.

Climate change is one of the most significant environmental challenges of present times, leading to extreme weather events, including droughts, forest fires, and floods. The primary driver for climate change is the release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere due to human activities, which trap heat and raise Earth's temperature. Aerosols (such as particulate matter, PM 2.5 ) not only affect public health but also influence the Earth's climate by absorbing and scattering sunlight and altering cloud properties. Although future climate change predictions are being reported, it is possible that the impacts of climate change could be more severe than predicted. Therefore, it is necessary to detect climate change accurately and as early as possible. Building on these insights, a research team from Japan, led by Professor Hitoshi Irie from the Center for Environmental Remote Sensing at Chiba University, utilized long-term observational data to study the effect of climate change on transboundary air pollution in the downwind area of China by using aerosols. They utilized a completely unique perspective on how aerosols impact climate and developed a new metric to detect climate change by considering aerosols as tracers. "The significance of this study lies in the fact that most of its results are derived from observational data. In natural sciences focused on Earth studies, the ultimate goal is to piece together highly accurate data obtained from observations to quantitatively understand the processes occurring on Earth and to pursue immutable truths. Therefore, the more observational data we have, the better. With the continued Earth observations by Japan's major Earth observation satellites (such as the GCOM series, GOSAT series, Himawari series, and ALOS series), we aim to complement these efforts with numerical simulations and data science methodologies to achieve a safe and secure global environment that mitigates the impacts of the climate crisis." explains Prof. Irie. The research team included Ms. Ying Cai from the Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Chiba University, Dr. Alessandro Damiani from the Center for Climate Change Adaptation, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Dr. Syuichi Itahashi and Professor Toshihiko Takemura from the Research Institute for Applied Mechanics, Kyushu University, and Dr. Pradeep Khatri from Faculty of Science and Engineering, Soka University. Their study was made available online on May 23, 2024, and published in Science of The Total Environment on August 20, 2024. China is a major contributor to air pollution in East Asia. The downwind area of China analyzed in this study is a unique open ocean area with minimal human interference yet an important zone of transboundary air pollution pathways, making it an ideal location for studying meteorological variations due to climate change. In their study, the researchers analyzed aerosol optical depth (AOD) datasets derived from satellites, reanalysis datasets, and numerical simulations focused on the Pacific Ocean in the downwind area of China, over 19 years from 2003 to 2021. AOD, a measure of the amount of sunlight blocked by aerosols, is a key factor is analyzing aerosols and their impact on climate change. The researchers developed a new metric called R AOD which utilized the potential of aerosols as tracers to evaluate the impact of climate change on transboundary air pollution pathways. Using R AOD the researchers were able to quantify significant temporal variations in aerosol transport. They discovered that long-term changes in R AOD due to climate change were outweighed by larger year-to-year variations in the meteorological field. Moreover, seasonal trends showed that aerosols moved west to east during spring and winter, and northward in summer. They concluded that the probability of aerosols from China to be transported far eastward was low, highlighting a shift in transboundary pollution pathways due to global warming. In this study the authors successfully detected climate change using long-term satellite observational data, in contrast to most existing studies that tracked transboundary air pollution using model simulations. "These results suggest that R AOD is a valuable metric for quantifying the long-term changes in transboundary air pollution pathways due to climate change. These results are particularly significant because most of them are derived from observational data," says Prof. Irie, highlighting the importance of the study. Sharing the future implications of their study he concludes, "The effects of climate change could be more severe than currently predicted. This study will help verify climate change predictions from an unconventional perspective of 'aerosol observation,' enabling a more accurate understanding of climate change progression and implementation of rational countermeasures." In summary, this study demonstrates an innovative use of aerosols as climate change tracers, marking a significant step forward in the global effort to tackle the pressing issue of climate change.

The finding is significant because the Antarctic Ice Sheet is the largest ice mass on Earth, and the biggest uncertainty in predicting future sea levels is how this ice will respond to climate change. "With nearly 700 million people living in coastal areas and the potential cost of sea-level rise reaching trillions of dollars by the end of the century, understanding the domino effect of Antarctic ice melt is crucial," said lead author Natalya Gomez, an Associate Professor in McGill's Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences and Canada Research Chair in Ice sheet -- Sea level interactions. The study focuses on how the ice sheet interacts with the earth beneath, and how that dynamic is influenced by carbon-emission levels. This relationship has not been thoroughly explored in previous studies, the researchers said. "Our findings show that while some sea level rise is inevitable, swift and substantive action to lower emissions could prevent some of the most destructive impacts of climate change, particularly for coastal communities," Gomez said. Rising seas and nature's double-edged sword As ice melts, its weight decreases, causing the land beneath it to rise like an expanding sponge. The researchers say this process, called post-glacial uplift, can be a double-edged sword. If emissions drop quickly, limiting global warming, post-glacial uplift can act as a natural brake on ice-mass loss. It lifts the ice up, slowing the flow of ice from land to ocean . The study found this dynamic can reduce Antarctica's contribution to sea- level rise by up to 40 per cent. However, if carbon outputs keep pace and the planet heats up quickly, the rebounding land will not be enough to slow the rapidly melting ice, and instead pushes more ocean water away from Antarctica, accelerating sea-level rise along populated coastlines. To reach their findings, Gomez and collaborating scholars from Canada and the United States developed a 3-D model of Earth's interior. Their model used geophysical field measurements from the U.S. ANET-POLENET project, which had pioneered large-scale deployments of sensitive instruments to record the bedrock uplift and seismic signals across large expanses of Antarctica. These extensive field measurements were essential for characterizing the three-dimensional variations of the Antarctic mantle incorporated in the study. "Our 3-D model peels back Earth's layers like an onion, revealing dramatic variations in thickness and consistency of the mantle below. This knowledge helps us better predict how different areas will respond to melting," said co-author Maryam Yousefi, a geodesist at Natural Resources Canada and previously a Postdoctoral Fellow at McGill and Penn State universities. It's the first model to capture the relationship between Antarctica's ice and underlying earth in such detail, she added. Notes Rob DeConto, a co-author and glaciologist at the University of Massachusetts, "This study marks a breakthrough in our ability to better predict the impacts of climate change on rising seas and to inform effective environmental policy." Global impacts The findings, published in Science Advances , highlight the inequalities of climate change, the scholars noted. Island nations, which contribute the least to global emissions, are likely to bear the brunt of their consequences, they said. The study is a collaboration between researchers at McGill, Pennsylvania State, Cambridge, Columbia, Colorado State, Ohio State, the University of Massachusetts Amherst, the University of Washington and the Union of Concerned Scientists. It was funded by the Canadian Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council, the U.S. National Science Foundation and the Canada Research Chairs program.

Despite feeling like a stationary mass, most solid ground is undergoing a process of deformation, sinking and rising in response to many environmental factors. In Antarctica, melting glacial ice means less weight on the bedrock below, allowing it to rise. How the rising earth interacts with the overlying ice sheet to affect sea level rise is not well-studied, said Terry Wilson, co-author of the study and a senior research scientist at the Byrd Polar and Climate Research Center at The Ohio State University. In the new study, Wilson's colleagues at McGill University developed a model to predict how these interactions could impact global sea level, finding that if humans can lower greenhouse gas emissions and global warming is slowed, upward shifts in the solid earth could reduce Antarctica's contribution to sea level rise by about 40%, significantly bolstering the best case scenarios for global sea level rise. In this low-emissions scenario, land uplift slows the flow of ice from land to ocean, allowing for more of the ice sheet to be preserved. Conversely, if humans are unable to lower carbon emissions in time, ice retreat will outpace uplift, pushing ocean water away from Antarctica and amplifying sea level rise. These events could significantly worsen the most dire models of projected sea level rise along populated coastlines, said Wilson. "Our measurements show that the solid earth that forms the base of the Antarctic ice sheet is changing shape surprisingly quickly," said Wilson. "The land uplift from reduced ice on the surface is happening in decades, rather than over thousands of years." The study was published today in Science Advances. To arrive at these conclusions, the team developed a 3D model of the Earth's interior using geophysical field measurements from the Antarctic Network (ANET) of the Polar Earth Observing Network (POLENET) project. The mission is focused on studying the changing polar regions by collecting GPS and seismic data from an array of autonomous systems across Antarctica. Researchers then performed a number of simulations to capture many possible evolutions of Antarctica's ice sheet and the extent of global sea level rise Earth may experience until the year 2500, according to those parameters. "We can project what difference it actually will make if we all contribute to a low-emission scenario now, versus what's come to be called 'business as usual' emissions," said Wilson, who is also the lead investigator of the ANET-POLENET project. She attributes the model's unprecedented level of detail to how deftly it incorporates data from Antarctica. GPS stations monitor how the land is moving and seismometers measure how fast seismic waves from earthquakes travel through the earth, yielding important insight into where the land uplift will be fast or slow. Surprisingly, according to some of the team's GPS observations processed by researchers at Ohio State, Wilson said, the Antarctic Ice Sheet is currently experiencing a solid earth uplift of about 5 centimeters per year, about 5 times the rate that North America experiences. Another significant aspect of the study is how the changes in Antarctica under different carbon emissions scenarios will impact coastlines around the world. Because sea level change will not be uniform, the study notes that nearly 700 million people around the world living in coastal regions will be most impacted by rising seas due to Antarctic ice loss. Since some regions, such as small island nations, will be more vulnerable than others, mitigating environmental conditions like atmospheric and ocean warming is a vital issue for society, said Wilson. "Many people are now more aware they're experiencing the effects of climate change," she said. "This work reinforces that our actions as individuals, nations and globally can make a difference in what kind of Earth our offspring will experience in their lifetimes." The study results highlight how complex the relationship between the solid earth and the processes that happen atop it is, as well as the importance of continuing to gather enough data to make prompt and accurate predictions about what the next few centuries of our planet will look like. "There's a lot of uncertainty in every model and every prediction that you make," said Wilson. "But to document how fast our world is changing, it's very important to continue advancing our ability to make predictions that are more certain, which is the only path that will allow us to tend to our future in a meaningful way." Wilson completed the study with colleagues from McGill University, Pennsylvania State University, the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Columbia University, Washington University, Colorado State University and the Union of Concerned Scientists. This study was supported by the U.S National Science Foundation and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.

It reveals that wetter climates led to very strong and weak floods and a highly instable river system, which may have rendered the Nile valley uninhabitable. Although intensified, flood variability was paced by similar climatic forcing as today, operating on annual -- like El Niño -- to multi-decadal timescales. This suggests that the occurrence of such extreme events might be predictable helping to reduce risks for local populations. Background: Nile River floods and climate change The iconic floods of the Nile River are often associated to the development of irrigation and agriculture in pharaonic Egypt. Today, seasonal rainfall and flooding remain crucial to sustain large populations in the Nile Valley, from the Equator to the Mediterranean coast. Climate models predict a large increase in monsoonal rainfall in this region due to global warming for all climatic scenarios. Recent episodes of droughts and flooding in Ethiopia, Sudan and Egypt have raised concerns about an increase in rainfall variability leading to such geohazards. Being one of the most densely populated area on Earth, it is critical to design reliable forecasting tools and plan adequate infrastructure based on informed-knowledge and process understanding of rainfall and flood changes. To tackle these issues, it is important to understand how large river systems will respond to enhanced rainfall. Insights can be gained from studying past time intervals that were known to be wetter and warmer than the present. A well-known example is the North African Humid Period during the Early Holocene, about 11 to 6 thousand years ago, characterised by a large increase in rainfall in northeastern Africa. Unique sediment core provides annual inside into ancient Nile River floods To access these ancient times, Cécile Blanchet and colleagues of the German Research Centre for Geosciences GFZ, together with Arne Ramisch (University of Innsbruck) and Monica Ionita (Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research, AWI) have analysed a unique sediment core collected right off the Nile mouth that recorded past floods. These seasonal floods brought varying amounts of fluvial particulate matter offshore, which were preserved as fine laminations. The core was taken in 2008 and dated back to the North African Humid Period. "Relics of such geological times provide researchers a natural laboratory to test and improve predictions from climate models," explains Cécile Blanchet. "This type of layered sediment is often found in lakes, and the GFZ is internationally known for having the technical and scientific expertise to analyse them. This one is unique because these are marine sediments recording past Nile floods at an annual resolution. So, I decided to come to the GFZ and set to explore this beautiful record." Sediment core analysis Analysis of the cores comprised looking at the layers, counting and measuring them under the microscope -- part of which was also done at home during the Covid-lockdowns. The chronology was constrained using a combination of annual layer counting and radiocarbon dating of fossil plankton buried in the layers. Blanchet quickly realised that the thickness of the flood layers was varying drastically in time spans of 30-40 years, from being very small (0,3 mm) to being very thick (10 mm). "It may sound not so much, but several millimetres deposited offshore is enormous," says Blanchet. "However, we know that large rivers are complicated systems, which may retain or release sediments independently of the discharge, that is the amount of water in the river. So, it is not always possible to relate the volume of sediments transported, expressed in our record as the thickness of the layers, to the size of the flood. But we noticed as well that the size of the particles increased in thicker layers, which means that the thickness of the layers is a reliable indicator of the strength of past floods." From her observations, Blanchet concluded that the North African Humid Period was characterised by the occurrence of extremely strong and variable Nile floods. Especially between 9,200 and 8,600 years ago, the dominance of thick flood layers depicts a period of strong erosional activity and the deposition of large amounts of particulate matter offshore, about two to three times as much as in the later years. Influence of the El Niño climate oscillation Joining forces with statisticians and modellers at the GFZ and the AWI allowed the team not only to determine the effects but also the drivers of flood variability. Using modelling of past sea-level changes done at GFZ, the researchers could exclude that any of these effects was driven by sea-level changes rather than the fluvial activity of the Nile. Analysing the data with statistical methods revealed several characteristic oscillations: on a shorter timescale with periodicities of 2-7 years, and on a longer time scale of several decades. This suggests that the floods were modulated by the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) on multi-annual timescales and a yet unidentified driver on multi-decadal timescales. "ENSO originates in the Pacific region and is transmitted to other parts of the World by atmospheric teleconnections," said co-author Monica Ionita from the AWI. "It was fascinating to see that we could find this variability both in the model and in the data." Comparison with Nilometer flood data from the past 2000 years The researchers compared their flood-record data from the time between 9,470 and 7,940 years before present, with data from the ancient Egyptians, recorded between 622 and 1922 CE, especially with regard to the oscillations: "The fact that ancient Egyptians measured the level of the Nile River in special buildings called 'Nilometers' -- see picture 2 -- year after year is really fascinating and they have offered us a unique record of past Nile floods in the last 2,000 years," said co-author Arne Ramisch, previously at GFZ and now at the University of Innsbruck. "The resolution and length of both records being similar, we could apply similar statistical tools and derive the main temporal variabilities. It showed us that the drivers remain quite similar even though the climatic conditions were different." This comparison shows that similar climate drivers can have very different effects, namely a much higher amplitude of flood magnitude under wetter and warmer climates. This is one of the main findings of the study. And it has important implications for building reliable tools to forecast and reduce flood risks. "I am sure that our findings will have direct applications and we are already working on providing constraints on flood magnitude based on the record we have. This is not trivial but with the help of modellers and geomorphologists, I am confident that we will tackle this new challenge," concludes Cécile Blanchet. Funding : The work of Cécile Blanchet has been supported through the reintegration grant "Annual Nile floods during the African Humid Period" by the GFZ Potsdam.

Looking at 2023 in isolation, warming caused by human activity reached 1.3 °C. This is lower than the total amount of warming we experienced in 2023 (1.43 °C), indicating that natural climate variability, in particular El Niño, also played a role in 2023's record temperatures. The analysis also shows that the remaining carbon budget -- how much carbon dioxide can be emitted before committing us to 1.5 °C of global warming -- is only around 200 gigatonnes (billion tonnes), around five years' worth of current emissions. In 2020, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) calculated the remaining carbon budget for 1.5 °C was in the 300 to 900 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide range, with a central estimate of 500. Since then, CO 2 emissions and global warming have continued. At the start of 2024, the remaining carbon budget for 1.5 °C stood at 100 to 450 gigatonnes, with a central estimate of 200. The Indicators of Global Climate Change Project is being coordinated by Professor Piers Forster, Director of the Priestley Centre for Climate Futures at the University of Leeds. He said: "Our analysis shows that the level of global warming caused by human action has continued to increase over the past year, even though climate action has slowed the rise in greenhouse gas emissions. Global temperatures are still heading in the wrong direction and faster than ever before. "Our analysis is designed to track the long-term trends caused by human activities. Observed temperatures are a product of this long-term trend modulated by shorter-term natural variations. Last year, when observed temperature records were broken, these natural factors were temporarily adding around 10% to the long-term warming." The warning comes as climate experts meet in Bonn to prepare the ground for the COP29 climate conference which takes place in November in Baku, Azerbaijan. The authoritative source of scientific information on the state of the climate is the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), but as its next major assessment will not happen until around 2027, this creates an "information gap," particularly when climate indicators are changing rapidly. The new report is accompanied by an open data, open science platform -- the Climate Change Tracker's Indicators of Global Climate Change dashboard which provides easy access to updated information on the key climate indicators. The latest Indicator report, which is published by more than 50 scientists in the journal Earth System Science Data, also provides new insight into the effects of reductions in sulphur emissions from the global shipping industry. The sulphur has a cooling effect on the climate by directly reflecting sunlight back to space and by helping more reflective clouds to form, but ongoing reductions in those emissions have lessened that effect. Although this was offset last year by the aerosol emissions from the Canadian wildfires, the report says the longer-term trend nonetheless indicates that the amount of cooling we can expect from aerosol emissions is continuing to decline. Other key findings: Professor Forster added: "Fossil fuel emissions are around 70% of all GHG emissions and clearly the main driver of climate change, but other sources of pollution from cement production, farming and deforestation and cuts to the level of sulphur emissions are also contributing to warming. "Rapidly reducing emissions of greenhouse gases towards net zero will limit the level of global warming we ultimately experience. At the same time, we need to build more resilient societies. The devastation wrought by wildfires, drought, flooding and heat waves the world saw in 2023 must not become the new normal." It is hoped that the report will play a strong role in informing new Nationally Determined Contributions, the improved climate plans that every country in the world has promised to put forward to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) by 2025 to cut emissions and adapt to climate impacts.

The health benefits of tackling climate change, such as cleaner air and more access to green spaces, were key drivers in city officials' decisions to continue with climate plans despite funding shortfalls caused by the COVID-19 crisis. Overall, the study showed that enduring and ambitious climate action during the pandemic was more common in cities in the Global South than in Europe or North America, despite greater funding challenges. Officials in these cities were also more likely to employ successful practices such as partnering with other cities to strengthen climate action plans, or with businesses to bolster sustainability initiatives. Study first author Dr Tanya O'Garra, from the Centre from Environmental Policy at Imperial College London, and Middlesex University, said: "Nearly 60% of people live in cities worldwide, which can be economically beneficial for them, but city-dwellers are increasingly vulnerable to multiple crises caused by pandemics, conflict and climate change itself. "City leaders often pave the way with ambitious climate action until calls to tackle these other threats can draw funds away from their climate goals. Because these major challenges are so intertwined, this leaves their populations more vulnerable to all risks. "If we find out how city officials can maintain action in the face of such challenges, we can help large populations, especially the poorest and most vulnerable to these interconnected risks, avoid the most serious consequences of climate change." The research, conducted by researchers in Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, the United States and the UK, is published in the journal Nature Cities . Driving climate action The team analysed survey data provided by city officials on the Carbon Disclosure Platform (CDP) from 2021, and other sources, to assess how 793 cities globally responded to the COVID-19 crisis in terms of their climate actions, funding and green recovery efforts. While they found that in the short term, the majority of city decision-makers kept up their climate commitments, green recovery plans were set up in only 43% of cities, suggesting the remainder of the cities are not investing in longer-term climate plans. Many previous studies of local city-based climate plans have focused on North America and Europe, but in this study 48% of the cities assessed were in the Global South. The results show that, in general, decision-makers for Global South cities have higher ambition in climate action and promoted more green recovery efforts despite facing greater funding shortfalls than cities in Europe and North America. The team identified two broad reasons underlying city officials' commitments to climate action. The first is exposure to environmental stress: in cities where citizens experience more climate-related issues (for example, climate hazards like floods or droughts, or persistent issues like air pollution) officials are more motivated to pursue sustained climate action. The second was early engagement with climate and sustainability: the more that city officials had already engaged in addressing climate and sustainability issues (for example, by joining climate networks, or by aligning economic development with sustainability), the more likely these issues had become embedded in city policies, processes and interactions, making them more likely to continue even under a crisis scenario. Measuring motivations The team are now conducting in-depth interviews with city planning and administration officials in a selection of the cities. Preliminary interviews with officials in Kochi, India, confirmed the credit for their resilience was due to many of the factors the team had identified in the data. For example, interviewees identified the benefits of existing coordination between state and local bodies and engagement with different stakeholders in planning, including academics, entrepreneurs, civil society organizations and the public. They noted that the pandemic also led to an increased focus on climate action in the city, which has also occurred after other natural disasters.

Revealing the additional damage of global warming The investigative study revealed a global GDP loss of up to 10 percent if the planet warms by +3ºC. Importantly, accounting for variability and extremes increases the costs of climate change around the world. "If we take into account that warmer years also come with changes in rainfall and temperature variability, it turns out that the estimated impact of spiking temperatures is worse than previously thought," explains doctoral researcher and economist Paul Waidelich. "Therefore, omitting variability and extremes risks underestimating the damage of temperature changes." The cost of climate inaction Stringent climate action is critical to future economic growth. Limiting global warming to 1.5ºC instead of 3ºC can reduce global losses from climate change by two thirds. "Our results show that the cost of climate inaction is substantial," stresses ETH Zurich professor, Sonia Seneviratne, a co-author of the study and a Vice Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's Working Group I. "Some people still say that the world cannot afford rapid decarbonization, but the global economy will also suffer from the impacts of climate change." Global warming of 3ºC also increases the risk of extreme rainfall worldwide, which reduces global GDP, on average, by 0.2 percent -- which, at the current size of the global economy, would equal US$ 200 billion. Much of these costs occur in the US and in China, which, unlike warmer tropical regions, are less used to extreme rainfall. However, among the extreme events considered, heatwaves are the most impactful. The study suggests that nearly half of the global economic damage at 3ºC of global warming may be related to extreme heat. Fulden Batibeniz, a postdoctoral researcher at ETH Zurich and the University of Bern explains, "Higher temperatures may seem beneficial for colder countries like Canada, but as we saw in 2021, they also bring much more severe heatwaves, which harm the economy." Socio-economic and climatic uncertainties However, projecting the impacts of climate variability and extremes is complex, and substantial uncertainties remain. When answering the question, "How much will climate change cost?" The research team concedes that uncertainties are primarily socio-economic: how long the impacts persist and how well can society adapt. Yet, how rainfall and climate extremes will evolve need to be better understood. Since the study does not include non-economic impacts, droughts, sea-level rise, and climate tipping points, the authors argue that the total cost of climate change is likely considerably higher.

A collection of eight studies -- all focusing on Brazil, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana and India -- shows that the risks of drought, flooding, declines in crop yields, and loss of biodiversity and natural capital greatly increase for each additional degree of global warming. The overarching picture for the accrual of climate risk across these countries as global warming increases from 1.5 ºC to 4 ºC above pre-industrial levels is presented in a final paper synthesizing the findings and published today in the journal Climatic Change . The team found very large increases in the exposure of agricultural land to drought with 3 ºC warming -- more than 50 per cent of the agricultural land in each country is projected to be exposed to severe droughts of longer than one year in a 30-year period. However, limiting global warming to 1.5 ºC would reduce the increase in exposure of agricultural land to drought by between 21 per cent (India) and 61 per cent (Ethiopia) as well as reduce economic damages due to fluvial flooding. Avoided increases in human exposure to severe drought are also 20-80 per cent lower at 1.5 °C than 3 °C across the six countries. Economic damages associated with sea-level rise are projected to increase in coastal nations, but more slowly if warming were limited to 1.5 °C. The researchers warn that more effort is needed to reduce global warming, as currently the policies in place globally are likely to result in 3 ºC of global warming. Also published today alongside the synthesis paper is a study on biodiversity in the six countries, exploring the risks to plants and vertebrates increases with global warming, and another paper that develops a new natural capital risk register for each country that also included the projected changes in risk stemming from future human population changes. This combination shows that many areas in the six countries are already at high natural capital risk at 1.5 ºC when effects of increasing human population is accounted for. When global warming increases, the risks escalate substantially. The study also showed that an expansion of protected area networks is necessary in order to deliver climate resilient biodiversity conservation. They are the last in the Topical Collection of studies published over the last three years in Climatic Change, addressing a research gap in assessing future climate change risks associated with global warming levels from 1.5 ºC to 4 ºC in a consistent and harmonised way across countries, yet at the national, not global, scale. Programme lead and lead author of the synthesis paper Prof Rachel Warren, of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research at UEA, said: "Until now, people have used very different datasets and models to explore climate change risks in different countries, or have conducted global analyses that make it difficult to resolve the implications for individual countries. "Since important decisions about climate change mitigation and adaptation are made at the national scale, national scale outputs are needed for informing policy. The results presented in this collection confirm the need for the implementation of climate policies aligned to the Paris Agreement limits if widespread and escalating climate change risk is to be avoided. "They provide additional confirmation of the rapid escalation of climate change risks with global warming found in the IPCC 2022 report, which identifies how the risk of severe consequences increases with every additional increment of global warming." Co-author Dr Jeff Price, also of the Tyndall Centre at UEA, added: "Although these studies focus on the risks to six countries only, other nations are projected to experience similar issues. Therefore, greater emphasis needs to be placed on both climate change mitigation and climate change adaptation to avoid large increases in risk to both human and natural systems. "For example, a good way to combat the effects of climate change on natural systems and soak up carbon from the atmosphere is to restore ecosystems to their natural state, especially if warming can be held to 2 °C or less. This has the additional benefit of restoring the natural capital bank in these areas." The work focuses on developing countries as they tend to be more vulnerable to climate change than others. Spanning the continents of Asia, Africa, and South America, the case studies present examples of both large and small countries and cover a range of levels of socioeconomic development. The risks assessed are the additional risks due to anthropogenic climate change corresponding to the elevated global warming in comparison with a baseline of levels of risk in 1961-1990, when global warming was approximately 0.3 °C above pre-industrial levels. Together the nine papers together provide a harmonised assessment for the six countries of projected changes in exposure of humans and land to climate-related hazards, such as drought, water stress, fluvial and coastal flooding, and the projected effects of climate change on biodiversity, as well as the economic and societal implications of climate risks. 'Risks associated with global warming of 1.5 to 4 °C above preindustrial levels in human and natural systems in six countries', Rachel Warren et al, is published in Climatic Change on Wednesday, February 28.

A new study led by researchers at the Department of Energy's Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Berkeley Lab) finds that the expected increase in rain has been largely offset by the drying effect of aerosols -- emissions like sulfur dioxide that are produced by burning fossil fuels, and commonly thought of as air pollution or smog. The research is published today in the journal Nature Communications . "This is the first time that we can really understand what's causing extreme rainfall to change within the continental U.S.," said Mark Risser, a research scientist at Berkeley Lab and one of the lead authors for the study. He noted that until the 1970s, the expected increases to extreme rainfall were offset by aerosols. But the Clean Air Act caused a drastic reduction in air pollution in the United States. "The aerosol masking was turned off quite suddenly. That means rainfall might ramp up much more quickly than we would have otherwise predicted." Traditional climate models have struggled to confidently predict the human impact on rainfall at scales smaller than a continent -- and that regional level is precisely where most climate change adaptations and mitigations take place. By using a new method and relying heavily on measurements from rain gauges from 1900 to 2020, researchers were able to more robustly determine how human activities have influenced rainfall in the United States. "Prior to our study, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC] had concluded that the evidence was mixed and inconclusive for changes in U.S. precipitation due to global warming," said Bill Collins, associate laboratory director for the Earth and Environmental Sciences Area at Berkeley Lab and co-lead author on the study. "We have now provided conclusive evidence for higher rainfall and also helped explain why past studies assessed by the IPCC reached conflicting conclusions." Specifically, the study isolates how greenhouse gas and aerosol emissions affect both average and extreme rainfall. Researchers confirmed that increased greenhouse gas emissions, which quickly disperse over the whole planet, cause an increase in rainfall. The impact from aerosols is more nuanced. Over the long term, aerosols cool the planet, which causes a drying effect. But they also have a faster, more local response. That fast impact depends on the season, with aerosols generally reducing rainfall in the winter and spring, and amplifying it in summer and fall over much of the United States. "The seasonality piece is really important," Risser said. "For rainfall, the nature of climate change depends on what season you're talking about, since different kinds of weather systems create precipitation in different parts of the year." Some of the conflicting studies looking at precipitation trends of the last century can be explained by how the effect of aerosols offsets the effect of greenhouse gases, and how models and simulations factor in these two driving forces. The researchers noted that tracking aerosols and incorporating them more fully into models and simulations will be important for improving the predictions used for infrastructure design and water resource management. The United States has already seen examples of recent increases in extreme precipitation, with several intense, record-setting storms in the past few years. "Thanks to improvements in air quality, the aerosols that shielded us from the worst effects of global warming are declining worldwide," Collins said. "Our work shows that the increases in extreme precipitation driven by elevated ocean temperatures will become increasingly obvious during this decade."

This portrayal, described by Debra Javeline, associate professor of political science at the University of Notre Dame and lead author on the recently published study "Russia in a changing climate," was debated by her 16 co-authors -- all Russia specialists and members of the Program on New Approaches to Research and Security in Eurasia (PONARS), a multinational cohort of academics from North America, Europe and post-soviet Eurasia. The PONARS scholars, including Susanne Wengle, also an associate professor of political science at Notre Dame, studied the effects of climate change on Russia and Russia's role in global efforts to combat climate change or obstruct climate action. "We asked ourselves," Javeline said of her research team, "does Russia stand to benefit from climate change? Are the claims made by the Russian government officials accurate in that it does benefit them?" The PONARS network includes social scientists of different disciplinary backgrounds, allowing each co-author to contribute analysis of Russia in their respective fields, including agriculture, international affairs, the changing Arctic, public health, civil society and governance. Drawing on their collective expertise and a comprehensive literature review, the researchers found that Russia is already suffering from a variety of climate change impacts -- despite the government's positive spin -- and is ill-prepared to mitigate or adapt to those climate impacts. And, as the rest of the world transitions to renewable energy sources, Russia's fossil-fuel-dependent government is not willing or ready to make alternative plans for the country, changes that could potentially benefit the whole of their society. "The future of Russia is politically and economically interdependent with the future of the climate," she said. "If we have any hope of seeing a peaceful Russia that can rejoin the international community with a more responsive government, then we can't talk about one without the other." But while Russia continues to wage a carbon-intensive war in Ukraine after a full two years, it remains "increasingly isolated from the international community and its efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions," the researchers wrote. The cause for concern lies in the fact that not only is Russia considered the world's largest country, occupying more than half the Arctic Ocean coastline, but it is also warming four times faster than Earth as a whole and is a primary emitter of greenhouse gases, according to the PONARS study. Environmental impacts already occurring in Russia include flooding, heat waves, drought and wildfires that affect not only communities, but agriculture, forestry and water resources as well. "Russia is one of the world's most important producers and exporters of grains," said Wengle, an expert on Russian agriculture. "What this means is that the effects of climate change on Russian farms are a concern not only for Russians, but for everyone concerned with global markets for commodity crops and global food security." Global warming has had a huge influence on Russia's permafrost, which is now thawing at alarming rates. What was once considered permanently frozen, stable ground is now defrosting, shifting and causing tremendous damage. The study pointed to increased flooding, landslides, caving or sinking of ground that supports existing infrastructures -- resulting in cracked foundations and compromised shelters. "Some Russian cities in high-latitude regions report infrastructure damage from thawing permafrost and soil instability for up to 80 percent of buildings and for pipelines," the researchers discovered. Russian leadership, however, interprets these climate impacts self-servingly and encourages its citizens to accept them as benefits, according to the PONARS scholars. For example, while Russian scientists warn about extreme temperatures and decreased Arctic sea ice, the Russian government touts a year-round Arctic sea route and a more livable climate overall. And although Russian climatologists study the effect of climate change, there are limited policies in place to reduce the vulnerability of some regions to climate impacts, and generally little adaptation planning and even less implementation of actual adaptations. The researchers found that there is also a real climate leadership deficit in Russia and an absence of commitment to mitigate and adapt. "No top political leader champions a climate agenda," they proclaimed. "Those in the highest positions of power demonstrate silence or denial." Furthermore, Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine has exacerbated the climate emergency. "The humanitarian disaster is of the utmost importance -- the number of deaths and structures that were destroyed -- but the collateral damage is intense destruction to the atmosphere," Javeline noted. The war has brought irreparable damage to the global climate from increased military emissions, which the researchers explain as taking the form of "potentially several million extra tons of carbon dioxide equivalent." Military operations have all had a harmful effect on the environment by adding toxic chemicals and hazardous waste into the air and water supplies. The PONARS study serves as a framework to identify gaps in research. In particular, the scientists believe that more research is needed on the political dimensions of Russia in our changing climate -- namely, taking a closer look at the country's centralized political system and how it handles policy challenges related to climate change. Javeline and Wengle added that the researchers hope to improve understanding of climate issues affecting Russia so that when Russian leadership does decide to acknowledge the country's precarious position in a changing climate, there will be a reliable base of knowledge to assist them with efforts to mitigate and adapt.

The total area of ice loss is equivalent to the size of Albania, and represents about 1.6 % of Greenland's total ice and glacier cover. Where there was once ice and snow, there is now barren rock, wetlands and areas of shrub. A team of scientists from the University of Leeds, who have tracked the changes across Greenland from the 1980s through to the 2010s, say warmer air temperatures are causing the ice to retreat, which in turn is having an impact on the temperature of the land surface, greenhouse gas emissions and the stability of the landscape. Permafrost -- a permanently frozen layer below the Earth's surface -- is being "degraded" by the warming and in some areas, the scientists warn that it could have an impact on the infrastructure, buildings and communities that exist above it. Their findings -- "Land cover changes across Greenland dominated by a doubling of vegetation in three decades"- are reported today (13/02) in the journal Scientific Reports. Impact of global warming Greenland is part of the Arctic region. It is the world's biggest island, around 836,330 sq miles in size (2.1 million sq km). Most of the land is covered by ice and glaciers and it is home to almost 57,000 people. Since the 1970s, the region has been warming at double the global mean rate. On Greenland, average annual air temperatures between 2007 and 2012 were 3 degrees C warmer, compared with the 1979 to 2000 average. And the researchers warn that more extreme temperatures are likely in the future. Jonathan Carrivick, an Earth scientist based in the Faculty of Environment at Leeds and one of the authors of the study, said: "Warmer temperatures are linked to the land cover changes that we are seeing on Greenland. "By analysing high resolution satellite images, we have been able to produce a detailed record of the land cover changes that are taking place." Ice disappears to be replaced by bare rock and shrubs Ice loss was concentrated around the edges of present-day glaciers but also in the north and south- west of Greenland. There were also high-levels of ice loss in localised areas in the west, mid-north-west and south-east. Over the three decades, the amount of land with vegetation growing on it increased by 33,774 sq miles (87,475 sq km), more than doubling over the study period. A pronounced increase in vegetation was seen across the south-west, east and north-east. The greatest increase in dense wetland vegetation occurred in the vicinity of Kangerlussuaq in the south-west and in isolated areas in the north-east. Analysis by the researchers revealed that vegetation had increased along a latitudinal gradient between 63 degrees North and 69 degrees North and declined north of this. Jonathan Carrivick said: "We have seen signs that the loss of ice is triggering other reactions which will result in further loss of ice and further 'greening' of Greenland, where shrinking ice exposes bare rock that is then colonised by tundra and eventually shrub. "At the same time, water released from the melting ice is moving sediment and silt, and that eventually forms wetlands and fenlands." Loss of ice triggers further warming The loss of ice affects land surface temperatures because of albedo, which is the measure of how reflective a surface is. Snow and ice are good reflectors of the sun's energy hitting the Earth's surface and this helps to keep the Earth cooler. As the ice retreats, it exposes bedrock which absorbs more solar energy, raising the temperature of the land surface. Similarly, as ice melts it increases the quantity of water in lakes. Water absorbs more solar energy than snow and this also increases the temperature of the land surface. Greenhouse gas emitter The analysis shows a near quadrupling of wetlands across Greenland, particularly in the east and north-east. The wetlands are a source of methane emissions. Writing in the paper, the researchers noted: "Expansion of vegetation and especially in wetland areas indicates but also exacerbates permafrost thaw, active layer thickening and thus emissions of greenhouse gasespreviously stored in these Arctic soils." The researchers also developed a model to predict those areas on Greenland that are likely to see "marked and accelerated" change in the future. Dr Michael Grimes, the lead author of the report who conducted the research as part of their PhD, added: "The expansion of vegetation, occurring in tandem with the retreat of glaciers and the ice sheet, is significantly altering the flow of sediments and nutrients into coastal waters. "These changes are critical, particularly for the indigenous populations whose traditional subsistence hunting practices rely on the stability of these delicate ecosystems. "Moreover, the loss of ice mass in Greenland is a substantial contributor to global sea level rise, a trend that poses significant challenges both now and in the future."

One of the many effects of global warming is sea-level rise due to the melting and retreat of the Earth's ice sheets and glaciers as well as other sources. As the sea level rises, large areas of densely populated coastal land could ultimately become uninhabitable without extensive coastal modification. In order to stave off this possibility, carbon emissions need to reach net negative, a state that is hard to achieve under current circumstances. There are many proposals to drastically mitigate the effects of climate change, and the most expansive of these involve interventions that will alter aspects of the entire globe -- the geoengineering techniques. While they have some promise, we do not understand enough about natural cycles to fully assess how beneficial such interventions will be. An international team of researchers led by Professor John C. Moore, at the University of Lapland, Rovaniemi, Finland, and Professor Ralf Greve, at the Institute of Low Temperature Sciences, Hokkaido University, has used simulations to examine the potential effects of a geoengineering technique called stratospheric aerosol injection on ice sheet melting. Their findings were published in the Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface . "Stratospheric aerosol injection, or SAI, would artificially introduce aerosols into the stratosphere by aircraft or high-altitude balloons to create a cooling effect via global dimming and increased albedo -- the degree to which Earth reflects sunlight," Moore explains. Moore, Greve and colleagues used the SICOPOLIS model to simulate the changes in the Greenland Ice Sheet for the period 1990-2090 under three different scenarios: RCP8.5 (worst-case scenario, unabated warming); RCP4.5 (intermediate scenario, possibly achievable under current conditions); and GeoMIP G4 (RCP4.5 plus the injection of 5 million metric tons of sulfur dioxide per year into the stratosphere during 2020-2070). The simulations showed that SAI of sulfur dioxide would have a clear protective effect on the Greenland Ice Sheet. Under RCP8.5, there would be ice loss equivalent to approximately 90 mm sea-level rise; under RCP4.5, ice loss would be approximately 60.6 mm sea-level rise; but under GeoMIP G4, ice loss would be limited to approximately just 37.6 mm sea-level rise. When these scenarios were tested with a different model, Elmer/Ice, the results were similar. The margins of the ice sheet would benefit the most under GeoMIP G4. "While this study shows that SAI could contribute to the protection of the Greenland Ice Sheet, and hence, potentially, all other ice cover on Earth, geoengineering is a highly contentious topic," Greve concludes. "The biggest issue is that it addresses only the symptoms of global warming, not the root causes -- and may even delay the changes required to address the causes. Furthermore, due to the immense complexity of the natural systems on Earth, it is impossible to predict exactly what positive and negative outcomes could result."

While accelerating sea level rise will result in widespread intermittent flooding and long-term inundation in many coastal communities, the paper, recently published in Nature Communications , showed that when these levels increase above 4 feet, minority populations will be disproportionately at risk of isolation. Rising sea levels could lead to isolation by disrupting transportation networks and roads, meaning that those affected lose access to essential locations such as critical emergency services and schools. The study further exposed that renters and older adults face a greater risk of isolation, highlighting the growing connection between historical drivers of existing social inequality and the groups that incur the most risk of climate change. According to Kelsea Best, lead author of the study and an assistant professor of civil, environmental and geodetic engineering at The Ohio State University, the first step in better characterizing these threats is changing how researchers assess community risk, as most studies measure this by exclusively determining impacts via direct flooding. But concentrating on this sole measurement neglects more complex aftereffects of sea level rise, such as isolation, and reinforces inequality in coastal areas, Best said. "We need to re-conceptualize how we measure who is burdened by sea level rise because there are so many ways that people might be burdened before their home is flooded," she said. Current reports estimate that around 20 million coastal residents in the U.S. will be affected by rising sea levels by 2030, but the paper notes that this number doesn't include the whole impact global warming will have on certain communities and demographics. Notably, because people need access to essential places like grocery stores, public schools, hospitals and fire stations, Best and her colleagues argue that an inability to reach these places impacts individuals just as negatively as if they were living in inundated homes themselves, and should be documented as such. Most importantly, their results expose one of the main reasons for these vast differences in risk: A group's risk of isolation is intimately entwined with specific road networks and where vital services are located in relation to where affected individuals reside. They identified these disparities in risk by overlaying OpenStreetMap (OSM) road network data with National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) mean higher high water (MHHW) scenarios. These projections were then combined with recent census data to estimate the percentage of a population that would be left out or missed in estimates of who would be impacted by sea level rise if researchers only counted those who suffered direct inundation. "If we take a one-size-fits-all approach, or a seemingly 'neutral' approach to understanding who gets access to safe, affordable housing and community in a world with climate change, then we're really just exacerbating these inequities and it's not good enough," said Best. "We have to deliberately seek to provide access to adaptation resources to groups of people who have historically been left out and therefore have fewer resources to respond in the first place." The researchers showed that Hispanic populations are often overrepresented in the total citizenry for being at risk of isolation beginning at 4 feet of sea level rise, and Black populations are overrepresented after 6 feet. Alternatively, white populations are underrepresented after 5 feet of sea level rise. But to determine when these disparities will begin to develop, Best's team compared two long-term sea level rise scenarios: an intermediate scenario in which global sea level rise increased by a meter by 2100, and a high scenario in which that number increased to 2 meters by the same year. Alarmingly, the study found strong evidence that these isolation effects would set in by 2120 in the intermediate scenario and as early as 2090 in the high scenario. "This timeline matters from a planning and adaptation perspective," said Best. "Part of why we included the temporal piece is to say this issue would not be as much of a problem if we had urgent, aggressive mitigation. "The effects of climate change are going to be further reaching and more cascading than might be directly obvious, and those effects are not going to be felt equitably," said Best. "So we need to be thinking about those populations most at risk from the beginning and develop policies to support them." The work was supported by the Clark Distinguished Chair Endowment (given to study co-author Deb. A. Neimeier of the University of Maryland) and the National Science Foundation. Other co-authors were Qian He from Rowan University, Allison C. Reilly from the University of Maryland, and Mitchell Anderson and Tom Logan from the University of Canterbury.

Professor Seung-Ki Min and Dr. Minkyu Lee, from the Division of Environmental Science and Engineering at Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), have used a high-resolution climate model to conduct a pioneering quantitative analysis of the impact of global warming on typhoons making landfall on the Korean Peninsula. This research has been recently published in npj Climate and Atmospheric Science . Notably, global warming is giving way to a surge in more powerful typhoons which maintain its intensity longer and thereby cause stronger damage. Accurate typhoon prediction and damage reduction necessitate better understanding of the global warming influences, for which climate model simulations with a km-scale resolution are eccential. However, studies quantifying the anthropogenic warming contribution to typhoons affecting Korea, especially research into the rainfall extremes accompanying typhoons, remain scant. To overcome this, the research team designed a 3 km high-resolution regional climate model simulation to investigate the impact of global warming on typhoon intensity and extreme precipitation. Four extremely strong typhoons that made landfall on the Korean Peninsula between 2011 and 2020 were chosen for simulation under current climate condition and counterfactual condition without human-induced warming. To reduce the uncertainties in regional sea surface temperature changes due to global warming, they utilized diverse ocean warming patterns estimated from CMIP6multiple climate models. The findings show that accounting for global warming from human activities augmented overall typhoon intensity and precipitation. The research team observed that the impact of warming was pronounced more strongly at maximum typhoon intensity than the average intensity. This implies more frequent occurrences of powerful super typhoons over East Asia in the future. Additionally, the area exposed to extreme rainfall generated by typhoons expanded 16 to 37 percent due to warmer climate conditions. Further, the expansion of extreme precipitation area is attributed to the strengthening of upward motion near the typhoon center and the increase in atmospheric water vapor due to the ocean surface warming. Professor Min explained, "Our results from high-resolution climate model simulations provide conclusive evidence that global warming has amplified the strength of recent typhoons making landfall on the Korean Peninsula. Continued escalation of global warming could lead to stronger typhoons and more extensive occurrences of rainfall extremes, demanding heightened sector-specific preparedness measures." This study received support from the Mid-Career Researcher Program of the National Research Foundation of Korea and the Korea Meteorological Administration Research and Development Program on Climate and Climate Change Monitoring and Prediction Information Application Technology.

"Our study confirms that the intensity and frequency of heavy rainfall extremes are increasing exponentially with every increment of global warming," explains Max Kotz, lead-author of the study published in the Journal of Climate . These changes follow the physical theory of the classic Clausius-Clapeyron relation of 1834, which established that warmer air can hold more water vapour. "State-of-the-art climate models vary on how strongly extreme rainfall scales with global warming and that they underestimate it compared to historical observations." "Climate impacts on society have been calculated using climate models. Now our findings suggest that these impacts could be much worse than we thought. Extreme rainfall will be heavier and more frequent. Society needs to be prepared for this," says PIK department head and author of the study Anders Levermann. Changes in the frequency and intensity of daily rainfall extremes over land can impact social welfare, the economy and social stability, given their link to flooding but also ground-water availability, which can cause considerable loss of life and financial losses. Stronger increases of extremes across tropical regions The researchers at PIK analysed the intensity and frequency of daily precipitation extremes over land in 21 state-of-the-art climate simulations (CMIP-6) and compared the changes projected by CMIP-6 models to those observed historically. The method they applied draws on pattern-filtering techniques, allowing them to separate which changes in the climate system are forced by human emissions, and which are not. While most land-areas exhibit increases in both the intensity and frequency of extremes, stronger increases are typically found across tropical regions, according to the study. Significant changes most often occur across the tropics and high-latitudes, like in Southeast Asia or Northern Canada. The fact that these changes follow the Clausius-Clapeyron relation underpins the fact that thermodynamics, i.e. temperature and not dynamics, i.e. winds, dominate the global change of extreme rainfall events. "The good news is that this makes it easier to predict the future of extreme rainfall. The bad news is: It will get worse, if we keep pushing up global temperatures by emitting greenhouse gases," Anders Levermann adds.

Now scientists led by the University of East Anglia (UEA) and the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) are calling for a roadmap of polar ecosystems to fill that knowledge gap, preserve polar life and even protect "our everyday life and our planet's health." The study would map all biodiversity in those regions, from the atmosphere to the deep sea and from land to the oceans. The authors said concerted action is required to mitigate the impact of warming on polar ecosystems via conservation efforts, to sustainably manage these unique habitats and their ecosystem services, and for the sustainable bioprospecting of novel genes and compounds for societal gain. 'Multi-omics for studying and understanding polar life', is published today in Nature Communications. The paper is co-authored by UEA, BAS and the University of Bielefeld, Germany. Polar ecosystems are the most threatened because they are the most sensitive to global warming. They are being lost at a rapid pace and with them all the biology that provides ecosystem services and biology-driven regulation of the climate, including the carbon cycle. Prof Thomas Mock, Professor of Marine Microbiology in UEA's School of Environmental Sciences, is the joint lead author with Prof Melody Clark, Project Leader for the British Antarctic Survey. Prof Thomas Mock said: "Biodiversity projections for the polar regions can only be reliably constructed if we have a sufficiently profound understanding of the diversity, ecological functions, and interrelations of polar organisms, as well as their resilience to climate change. "These remote regions play substantial, often underappreciated, roles in the carbon cycle and drive global nutrient and dissolved organic matter fluxes. Consequently, polar environmental and ecological processes are intimately connected with our everyday life and our planet's health, much of which is underpinned by the endemic biota, from viruses to large animals. "There is strong evidence that climate-induced changes in the polar regions are already altering species distributions on land and in the sea, with major impacts on ecosystem function." Some species have shifted poleward, which has a knock-on effect on the food chain. Polar life, from microbes to seals, whales and polar bears, largely depends on overall low temperature and a substantial snow and ice cover, which are experiencing the impacts of global warming. In the Arctic, temperatures are rising at least four times faster than elsewhere, destabilising the Arctic jet stream and increasing the likelihood of extreme weather events including heat waves, drought and flooding in temperate regions. On land, permafrost melting and collapsing Arctic coastlines are dramatically altering ecological interactions and biogeochemistry due to the release of millennia-old carbon stores, trace elements, nutrients and potentially even deep-frozen ancient viruses and pathogenic bacteria. In the oceans, the increased seasonal melting of sea ice is stabilizing surface waters too much, which reduces the amount of nutrients required for primary production to take place. Similarly, the situation in the Southern Ocean and Antarctic continent is equally bleak, particularly for the Antarctic Peninsula, which has already experienced substantial levels of warming that has increased the loss of sea ice and glaciers. The Southern Ocean is responsible for the uptake of three-quarters of the anthropogenic heat absorbed by the ocean and up to half of the carbon drawdown. It accounts for around 40 per cent of the global oceanic uptake of anthropogenic CO2 and around 50 per cent of the total atmospheric uptake. Furthermore, sequestering carbon by the organisms living in polar seas is probably the largest natural negative feedback against climate change. The climate impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in both the Arctic and Antarctic serve as a bellwether for the consequences of global warming, including the persistence of biodiversity on Earth. Prof Clark said: "Sequencing technologies have massively changed our abilities to decipher how organisms work. However the uptake in polar biology has been relatively low, especially when considering the tens of thousands of species that reside at the poles and are at threat in our warming world. "Understanding how lots of very strange organisms living in extreme cold can help answer globally questions and provide real benefits for society. Failure to act now will result in a substantial loss of knowledge regarding evolutionary adaptation to the cold." Genomic screening not only offers the possibility of identifying populations under stress, but it can also be used for the monitoring of invasive species, thereby facilitating early interventions. Prof Mock said: "With the cold regions of our planet diminishing, there is a real imperative to obtain full genome sequences for diverse organisms inhabiting polar ecosystems, from the deep oceans to the permafrost on land, for both the Arctic and Antarctic. This will enable the wider application of omics technologies to polar species, which will revolutionise our understanding of evolution in the cold and adaptive responses to a warming world." 'Multi-omics for studying and understanding polar life', is published on 20 November 2023 in Nature Communications.

The study, one of the first to look at how climate engineering might impact Antarctica, comes as scientists sound the alarm over the increasing likelihood of accelerated ice loss in West Antarctica this century. The work appears in the Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres . "Even if the world meets the ambitious target of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels -- which we are not on track to do -- we are going to see significant sea-level rise," said Paul Goddard, an assistant research scientist in the IU College of Arts and Sciences' Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences and the lead author of the study. "Exploring ways to reflect sunlight into space before it is absorbed into Earth's climate system could help buy us more time to address climate change and avoid or delay climate tipping points, such as collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet." In addition to Goddard, co-authors on the paper include IU earth and atmospheric sciences assistant professor Ben Kravitz; Douglas MacMartin and Daniele Visioni of Cornell University; Ewa Bednarz with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; and Walker Lee of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The study explored a form of climate engineering called stratospheric aerosol injection, in which large amounts of tiny sulfur droplets are released into the stratosphere by a fleet of airplanes as a proposed method for keeping global temperatures in check. The approach mimics what happens when a large volcano spews vast amounts of particles into the upper atmosphere and precipitates a cooling effect that can last months to years. It was recently discussed in a White House report outlining a potential research program on stratospheric aerosol injection and marine cloud brightening, another proposed strategy for cooling the planet. Ten of the hottest years on record have occurred in the last 14 years. That's including 2023, which is on track to supplant 2016 as the hottest year ever recorded. The spike in global temperatures has coincided with unprecedented heat waves, wildfires, flash flooding, and other climate-related impacts around the world. In their study, IU researchers and collaborators used high-performance computers and global climate models to simulate different stratospheric aerosol injection scenarios, identifying the cooling strategy with the most potential to slow Antarctic ice loss. A portion of the data analysis conducted for the study took place on IU University Information Technology Services' large-memory computer cluster, Carbonate. "Where you release the aerosols matters a lot and can affect the climate differently," Goddard said. "In this case, we found that releasing stratospheric aerosols at multiple latitudes within the tropics and sub-tropics, with a greater proportion in the Southern Hemisphere, is the best strategy for preserving land ice in Antarctica because it helps keep warm ocean waters away from the ice shelves." Researchers simulated 11 different stratospheric aerosol injection scenarios. Three cases spanned multiple latitudes -- considered the most likely approach for how stratospheric aerosols injection might be implemented -- with temperature targets of 1.5, 1 and 0.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. The simulations, which started in 2035 and ran through 2070, included a moderate emissions scenario with no stratospheric aerosol injection that served as a key point of comparison. Though simulated scenarios with stratospheric aerosol injection at multiple latitudes showed benefits in terms of Antarctic ice loss, further study is needed to quantify the change in melt rates, Goddard said. Notably, several single-latitude injection scenarios actually accelerated Antarctic ice loss due to a southward shift of prevailing winds drawing warm ocean waters toward the ice shelves. "If we're ever going to engineer the climate, how we do it really matters," Goddard said. Some of the risks related to stratospheric aerosol injection, for example, include changes in regional precipitation patterns and the possibility of "termination shock," a rapid rebound of global temperatures to pre-stratospheric aerosols injection levels should the decades-long treatment be interrupted. The study adds to an expanding body of knowledge about the benefits and drawbacks of deliberately cooling the planet, a concept that is being discussed more widely as the effects of climate change become more prominent, Kravitz said. "If society decides it wants to do geoengineering someday, we need to better understand what we know and what we don't know," he said. "We're starting to fill some of these knowledge gaps on the risks and regional effects of managing solar radiation, but there's a lot more research that needs to be done before anyone can say whether it's a good idea to actually move forward with it. That's true as much for Antarctica as it is for the rest of the planet."

To piece together the magnitude of glacier retreat, the research team combined satellite images with historical aerial photographs of Greenland's coastline, which is dotted with thousands of glaciers that are separate from the island's massive central ice sheet. With these one-of-a-kind data, the researchers documented changes in the lengths of more than 1,000 of the country's glaciers over the past 130 years. Although glaciers in Greenland have experienced retreat throughout the last century, the rate of their retreat has rapidly accelerated over the last two decades. According to the multiyear collaborative effort between the United States and Denmark, the rate of glacial retreat during the 21st century is twice as fast as retreat during the 20th century. And, despite the range of climates and topographical characteristics across Greenland, the findings are ubiquitous, even among Earth's northernmost glaciers. The findings underscore the region's sensitivity to rising temperatures due to human-caused climate change. The study will be published on Thursday (Nov. 9) in the journal Nature Climate Change. "Our study places the recent retreat of peripheral glaciers across Greenland's diverse climate zones into a century-long perspective and suggests that their rate of retreat in the 21st century is largely unprecedented on a century timescale," said Laura Larocca, the study's first author. "The only major possible exception are glaciers in northeast Greenland, where it looks like recent increases in snowfall might be slowing retreat." The study finds that climate change explains the accelerated glacier retreat and that glaciers across Greenland respond quickly to changing temperatures. This highlights the importance of slowing global warming. "Our activities over the next couple decades will greatly affect these glaciers. Every bit of temperature increase really matters," Larocca said. "This work is based on vast analyses of satellite imagery and digitization of thousands of historical aerial photographs -- some taken during early mapping expeditions of Greenland from open-cockpit airplanes," said Northwestern's Yarrow Axford, a senior author on the study. "Those old photos extend the dataset back prior to the satellite era, when widespread observations of the cryosphere are rare. It's quite extraordinary that we can now provide long-term records for hundreds of glaciers, finally giving us an opportunity to document Greenland-wide glacier response to climate change over more than a century." Axford is the William Deering Professor of Geological Sciences at Northwestern's Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences. When the research began, Larocca was a Ph.D. candidate in Axford's laboratory. Now, Larocca is a NOAA Climate & Global Change Postdoctoral Fellow hosted at Northern Arizona University. She will join Arizona State University's School of Ocean Futures as an assistant professor in January 2024. While climate change's effects on Greenland are well studied, most researchers focus on the Greenland Ice Sheet, which covers roughly 80% of the country. But fluctuations in Greenland's peripheral glaciers -- the smaller ice masses distinct from the ice sheet that dot the country's coastline -- are widely undocumented, in part due to a lack of observational data. Prior to the launch of Earth-observing satellites in the 1970s, researchers did not have a full understanding of how temperature changes affected Greenland's glaciers. Widespread and detailed observational records simply did not exist -- or so researchers thought. A breakthrough came about 15 years ago when long-forgotten aerial photographs of Greenland's coastline were rediscovered in a castle outside Copenhagen. Now housed within the Danish National Archives, the images enabled study senior author Anders Bjørk, an assistant professor at the University of Copenhagen, to begin constructing the glaciers' history. "Starting in the 1930s, Danish pilots clad in polar bear-fur suits set out on aerial mapping campaigns of Greenland and ended up collecting over 200,000 photos of the island's coastline," Larocca said. "They also unintentionally captured the state of Greenland's peripheral glaciers." In previous studies, Bjørk and his collaborators digitized and analyzed photos to study 361 glaciers in the southeast, northwest and northeast regions of Greenland. In the new study, Larocca, Axford and their team added records for 821 more glaciers in the south, north and west regions and extended Bjørk's records to present day. As a part of this effort, the team digitized thousands of paper-copy aerial photographs taken from open-cockpit planes and collected imagery from multiple satellites. The researchers also removed terrain distortion and used geo-referencing techniques to place the photos at the correct locations on Earth. "There really aren't any automated processes to digitize all these photos," said Larocca, who began the project in 2018. "A project like this takes a lot of people and a lot of manual labor to scan and digitize all these analog air photos. Then, we had to do a lot of preprocessing work before making our measurements." Larocca, Axford and their team also extended records further back in time by leveraging clues hidden within the landscape. When glaciers grow larger and then retreat, they leave behind a terminal moraine (sediment transported and deposited by a glacier, often in the form of a long ridge). Locating these moraines enabled the researchers to map older glacier extents before pilots took their first flyover photos in the early 1930s. Using the late 20th-century imagery as a baseline, Larocca, Axford and their team also calculated the percentage of length that glaciers have lost over the past 20 years. They found that, on average, glaciers in south Greenland lost 18% of their lengths, while glaciers in other regions lost between 5-10% of their lengths over the past 20 years. As global temperatures increase, it has become more imperative than ever to better understand how these melting glaciers will affect rising sea levels and reliable sources of fresh water. "Peripheral glaciers only represent about 4% of Greenland's total ice-covered area, but they contribute 14% of the island's current ice loss -- a disproportionately large portion," Larocca said. "If you look globally at all glaciers that are distinct from the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheet, they have contributed roughly 21% of observed sea level rise over the last two decades. So, these smaller ice masses are an important part of the sea level problem. Millions of people worldwide also rely on glaciers for fresh water, agriculture and hydropower, so it's deeply concerning that we're allowing this to continue. The choices we make over the next few years will make a huge difference to how much ice we lose."

Current valuation methods for forest conservation projects have come under heavy scrutiny, leading to a crisis of confidence in carbon markets. This is hampering efforts to offset unavoidable carbon footprints, mitigate climate change, and scale up urgently needed investment in tropical forest conservation. Measuring the value of carbon storage is not easy. Recent research revealed that as little as 6% of carbon credits from voluntary REDD+ schemes result in preserved forests. And the length of time these forests are preserved is critical to the climate benefits achieved. Now, a team led by scientists at the University of Cambridge has invented a more reliable and transparent way of estimating the benefit of carbon stored because of forest conservation. The method is published today in the journal Nature Climate Change . In it, the researchers argue that saving tropical forests is not only vital for biodiversity, but also a much less expensive way of balancing emissions than most of the current carbon capture and storage technologies. The new approach works a bit like a lease agreement: carbon credits are issued to tropical forest projects that store carbon for a predicted amount of time. The valuation is front-loaded, because more trees protected now means less carbon released to the atmosphere straight away. The technique involves deliberately pessimistic predictions of when stored carbon might be released, so that the number of credits issued is conservative. But because forests can now be monitored by remote sensing, if projects do better than predicted -- which they usually will -- they can be rewarded through the issue of further credits. The payments encourage local people to protect forests: the carbon finance they receive can help provide alternative livelihoods that don't involve cutting down trees. And by allowing for future payments, the new method generates incentives for safeguarding forests long after credits have been issued. This contrasts with the current approach, which passes on a burden for conservation to future generations without compensation for lost livelihoods. The approach also allows different types of conservation projects to be compared in a like-for-like manner. "Until now there hasn't been a satisfactory way of directly comparing technological solutions with nature-based solutions for carbon capture. This has caused a lack of enthusiasm for investing in carbon credits linked to tropical forest protection," said Dr Tom Swinfield, a researcher in the University of Cambridge's Department of Zoology and senior author of the study. He added: "Tropical forests are being cleared so quickly that if we don't protect them now, we're not going to make the vital progress we need towards net-zero. Buying carbon credits linked to their protection is one of the best ways to do this." Tropical forests play a key role in taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere, helping to reduce global warming and avert climate catastrophe. But the carbon they capture is not taken out of the atmosphere permanently: forests can be destroyed by pests, floods, fire, wind -- and by human clearance. This impermanence, and therefore the difficulty of reliably measuring the long-term climate benefit of tropical forest protection, has made it an unattractive proposition for investors wanting to offset their carbon emissions. And this is despite it being a far cheaper investment than more permanent, technology-based methods of carbon capture and storage. Protection of tropical forests, a nature-based solution to climate change, comes with additional benefits: helping to conserve biodiversity, and supporting the livelihoods of people living near the forests. "Nature-based carbon solutions are highly undervalued right now because the market doesn't know how to account for the fact that forests aren't a permanent carbon storage solution. Our method takes away a lot of the uncertainties," said Anil Madhavapeddy, a Professor in the University of Cambridge's Department of Computer Science and Technology, who was involved in the study. The new method, developed by scientists at the Universities of Cambridge and Exeter and the London School of Economics, is called 'Permanent Additional Carbon Tonne' (PACT) accounting, and can be used to value a wide range of nature-based solutions. "Carbon finance is a way for us -- the carbon emitters of the richer world -- to direct funds towards rural communities in the tropics so they can get more out of the land they have, without cutting down more trees," said Andrew Balmford, Professor of Conservation Science at the University of Cambridge and first author of the paper. Co-author Srinivasan Keshav, Robert Sansom Professor of Computer Science at Cambridge added: "Our new approach has the potential to address market concerns around nature-based solutions to carbon offsetting, and lead to desperately needed investment." Conversion of tropical forest to agricultural land results in vast carbon emissions. Around 30% of all progress towards the ambitious net-zero commitments made at COP26 is reliant on better management of carbon in nature. Other carbon credit investment options include technologies that remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and lock it deep in the Earth for hundreds of years. These permanent storage options may currently be easier to value, say the researchers, but they typically cost substantially more than nature-based solutions and do nothing to protect natural habitats that are vital in regulating the global climate and mitigating the extinction crisis.

For a paper published recently in the American Geophysical Union journal Geophysical Research Letters , the scientists studied the role of Foehn and katabatic winds, downslope gusts that bring warm, dry air into contact with the tops of glaciers. They said that melting of the Greenland ice sheet related to these winds has gone up by more than 10 percent in the past 20 years; the impact of the winds on the Antarctic ice sheet has decreased by 32 percent. "We used regional climate model simulations to study ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica, and the results showed that downslope winds are responsible for a significant amount of surface melt of the ice sheets in both regions," said co-author Charlie Zender, UCI professor of Earth system science. "Surface melt leads to runoff and ice shelf hydrofracture that increase freshwater flow to oceans -- causing sea level rise." While the impact of the winds is substantial, he said, the distinct behaviors of global warming in the Northern and Southern hemispheres are causing contrasting outcomes in the regions. In Greenland, wind-driven surface melt is compounded by the massive island "becoming so warm that sunlight alone (without wind) is enough to melt it," according to Zender. The 10 percent growth in wind-driven melt combined with warmer surface air temperatures has resulted in a 34 percent increase in total surface ice melt. He attributes this outcome in part to the influence of global warming on the North Atlantic Oscillation, an index of sea level pressure difference. The shifting of NAO to a positive phase has led to below-normal pressure across high latitudes, ushering warm air over Greenland and other Arctic areas. The authors found that, in contrast with Greenland, total Antarctic surface melt has decreased by about 15 percent since 2000. The bad news is that this reduction is largely due to 32 percent less downslope wind-generated melt on the Antarctic Peninsula where two vulnerable ice shelves have already collapsed. Zender said it's fortunate that the Antarctic stratospheric ozone hole discovered in the 1980s continues to recover, which temporarily helps to insulate the surface from further melt. "The ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica keep over 200 feet of water out of the ocean, and their melt has raised global sea level by about three-quarters of an inch since 1992," said Zender, who holds a joint appointment in UCI's Department of Computer Science. "Although Greenland has been the No. 1 driver of sea level rise in recent decades, Antarctica is close behind and catching up and will eventually dominate sea level rise. So it's important to monitor and model melt as both ice sheets deteriorate, including the ways climate change alters the relationship between wind and ice." He said he hopes that the research on the role of Foehn and katabatic winds in polar regions will help the climate science community strengthen the physical fidelity of Earth system models. Zender was joined on this project by Matthew Laffin and Wenshan Wang of UCI's Department of Earth System Science and Melchior van Wessem and Brice Noel of the University of Utrecht's Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Research. The researchers received financial support from the U.S. Department of Energy, the National Science Foundation and the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research.

"When intense tropical cyclones occur earlier than usual, they cause unexpected problems for communities," said Pao-Shin Chu, atmospheric sciences professor in the UH Manoa School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology and Hawai'i State Climatologist. "Moreover, the earlier advance of these storms will overlap with other weather systems, for example local thunderstorms or seasonal monsoon rainfall, and can produce compounding extreme events and strain the emergency response." Changes in many characteristics of intense hurricanes under a warming climate, for example, the number, intensity, and lifespan, are fairly well-studied. However, little is known about changes in the seasonal cycle of these intense events. Using satellite data, historical tropical cyclone tracks, NOAA rainfall records, and various statistical methods, Chu and co-authors found that there has been a significant shift of these intense tropical cyclones from autumn to summer months since the 1980s in most tropical oceans. The effect was particularly observed in the eastern North Pacific off the coast of Mexico, where most hurricanes near Hawai'i come from; the western North Pacific; the South Pacific; the Gulf of Mexico; and the Atlantic coast of Florida and the Caribbean. "It was surprising to consistently see earlier arrivals when we independently assessed satellite data and conventional ground-based observations of intense tropical cyclones," said Chu. In August 2017, for example, Hurricane Harvey, a Category 4 hurricane, made landfall on Texas and Louisiana and inflicted catastrophic flooding and more than 100 deaths. Using simulations from multiple global climate models (e.g., high-resolution CMIP6 models), the team detected warmer oceanic conditions developed earlier, which favored the earlier onset of intense tropical cyclones. Further, they found that the warming was primarily driven by greenhouse gas forcing. "In a future with high carbon dioxide emissions, the earlier shifting trend is projected to be amplified," said Chu. In South China and the Gulf of Mexico, the earlier onset of intense tropical cyclones contributes significantly to an earlier onset of extreme rainfall. "Given the seasonal advance of intense tropical cyclones, as shown in this study, the potential for simultaneous occurrence with other high-impact weather events should be a serious concern for the society," said Chu. "Understanding potential changes in hurricane activity in response to global warming is important for disaster prevention, resource management and community preparedness."

The study, published in Science Advances , used satellite radar data to track subtle shifts in ground elevation across Greater New Orleans between 2002 and 2020. The study found that some neighborhoods, wetlands and even sections of floodwalls are sinking by more than an inch per year -- with some areas experiencing up to 47 millimeters (nearly 2 inches) of elevation loss annually. "In a city like New Orleans, where much of the land is already near sea level, even minor drops in elevation can increase flood risk," said Simone Fiaschi, lead author of the study and a former researcher with Tulane's Department of River-Coastal Science and Engineering, now employed at TRE-Altamira. The findings underscore how both natural and human-driven forces are reshaping the city's landscape. Causes of the sinking -- known as subsidence -- include natural soil compaction, groundwater pumping, industrial development and the legacy of wetland drainage for urban growth. The study used a remote sensing technique called InSAR (Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar), which detects millimeter-scale changes in land surface elevation by comparing satellite radar images taken over time. This allowed the researchers to build the most detailed map yet of vertical land motion in New Orleans -- including areas like wetlands that had previously lacked reliable data. Among the most troubling findings: some of the concrete floodwalls and levees built to protect the city after Katrina are themselves sinking. In a few cases, parts of the Hurricane and Storm Damage Risk Reduction System (HSDRRS) are losing elevation faster than sea levels are rising, reducing their capacity to block storm surges. "These results are a wake-up call," said co-author Prof. Mead Allison, also of Tulane. "We need ongoing monitoring and maintenance to ensure that our flood defenses don't lose their level of protection beneath us." The study also found pockets of sinking around industrial sites, the airport and newer residential developments -- areas where soil compression and groundwater withdrawal are likely contributors. In contrast, some areas such as parts of Michoud showed modest land uplift, likely due to the halt of industrial groundwater pumping and recovery of the water table. Wetlands east of the city, long known for their ecological importance, are also sinking rapidly in places. In some spots, the loss of elevation could transform marshes into open water within a decade if trends continue. This has implications not just for wildlife but also for storm protection, as wetlands help buffer storm surges. New Orleans, much of which lies below sea level, relies on an elaborate system of levees, pumps and drainage canals to keep water out. As sea levels rise and the ground sinks, the margin for error narrows. Experts say that without sustained monitoring, including satellite data and ground-based measurements, it's difficult to know where to reinforce levees or how to plan for future storms. "This research shows that land movement isn't uniform, and understanding these patterns is crucial for protecting lives and property in a city where inches truly matter," Fiaschi said. "However, it's crucial to remember that our results still require careful ground-truthing. This is especially true for critical areas like the floodwalls, where on-site verification was not possible during this project." The study highlights the potential of satellite monitoring to guide infrastructure maintenance and urban planning, not just in New Orleans but in coastal cities worldwide facing similar challenges.

Extreme water levels -- like the 15 feet of flooding Floridians saw during Hurricane Helene in 2024 -- threaten lives, wash away homes, and damage ecosystems. But they can be difficult to predict without complex, data-intensive computer models that areas with limited resources can't support. A recent study published in Water Resources Research by civil and environmental engineering graduate student Samuel Daramola, along with faculty advisor David F. Muñoz and collaborators Siddharth Saksena, Jennifer Irish, and Paul Muñoz from Vrije Universiteit Brussel in Belgium, introduces a new deep learning framework to predict the rise and fall of water levels during storms -- even in places where tide gauges fail or data is scarce -- through a technique known as "transfer learning." The framework, called Long Short-Term Memory Station Approximated Models (LSTM-SAM), offers faster and more affordable predictions that enable smarter decisions about when to evacuate, where to place emergency resources, and how to protect infrastructure when hurricanes approach. For emergency planners, local governments, and disaster response teams, it could be a game-changer -- and could save lives. Addressing the challenge of predicting floods with transfer learning Predicting when and where extreme water levels will strike -- especially during compound floods, when multiple flooding sources, like rain and storm surge, combine to intensify flooding -- is crucial for protecting vulnerable communities. However, conventional physical-based models rely on detailed information about weather patterns, ocean conditions, and local geography. Gathering and processing this data is time consuming and expensive, limiting the models' use to areas with long-term data records and high-powered computers. To overcome these limitations, the research team developed LSTM-SAM, a deep-learning framework that analyzes patterns from past storms to predict water level rise during future storms. What makes this model especially useful is its ability to extrapolate from one geographic area's data to make predictions for another locale that doesn't have a lot of its own data. By borrowing knowledge and applying it locally, it makes accurate flood prediction more widely available. "Our goal was to create an efficient transfer learning method that leverages pre-trained deep learning models," said Daramola. "This is key to quickly assessing many flood-prone areas after a hurricane." Testing with coastal flood predictions The researchers tested LSTM-SAM at tide gauge stations along the Atlantic coast of the United States, a region frequently impacted by hurricanes and other major storms. They found that the model was able to accurately predict the onset, peak, and decline of storm-driven water levels. The model was even able to reconstruct water levels for tide-gauge stations damaged by hurricanes, such as the station in Sandy Hook, New Jersey, which failed during Hurricane Sandy in 2012. Researchers plan on using the LSTM-SAM framework during the upcoming hurricane season, where they can test it as storms roll in nearly in real time. They've also made the code available in the GitHub repository of the CoRAL Lab, where scientists, emergency planners, and government leaders can download it for free. The program runs on a laptop in a matter of minutes and could be especially helpful for smaller towns or regions in developing countries where access to high-end computing tools or detailed environmental data is limited. "Other studies have relied on repetitive patterns in the training data," Daramola said. "Our approach is different. We highlight extreme changes in water levels during training, which helps the model better recognize important patterns and perform more reliably in those areas." As the frequency of hurricane events and their socioeconomic impact is likely to increase in the future, the need for reliable flood prediction frameworks is of paramount importance. Advanced deep learning tools like LSTM-SAM could become essential in helping coastal communities prepare for the new normal, opening the door to smarter, faster, and more accessible flood predictions associated with tropical cyclones. Original study: DOI 10.1029/2024WR039054 This research was made possible by support from the National Science Foundation, CAS-Climate Program, and the Virginia Sea Grant Fellowship.

This year, the report cards are consolidated in an interactive dashboard and add data from tide gauge stations in Annapolis, MD; Solomons Island, MD; Yorktown, VA; and Fort Myers, FL. Most sea level projections are based on an understanding of average global sea level rise. However, sea levels do not rise uniformly across the world. Factors such as geological uplift, land subsidence, ocean currents and other processes all impact regional sea level trends. "Many people who live near the coast want to know what they can reasonably expect over the next few decades, giving them time to make actionable plans and decisions," says Molly Mitchell, an assistant professor at the Batten School of Coastal & Marine Sciences & VIMS. "Compared to other predictions based on satellite data and global computer models, our reports are created using observed tide gauge data from the past 55 years and reflect the exact experience at the location of the gauge. The annual release of the report cards allows coastal regions to examine if past trends are changing and alter their planning accordingly." The reports group localities into East Coast, Gulf Coast, West Coast and Alaskan Coast regions. Each report card shows values for monthly sea level averages along with high-and low-water levels caused by storms and other transient events, as well as a decadal signal showing the influence of longer-term climate patterns such as El Niño. Observed rates of acceleration are factored into future projections and are displayed in comparison to a linear trendline that does not account for acceleration. The projections also show the range of sea level rise within the 95% confidence interval, which allows individuals and municipalities to plan adequately for the highest predicted rates of sea level rise caused by things like storm surge and tidal flooding. Overall, most locations continue a trend of accelerating sea level rise. However, Mitchell notes that projections have remained mostly uniform since reporting began in 2018, apart from a few notable exceptions. "One interesting new trend is the acceleration occurring in southeastern states such as South Carolina and Georgia," said Mitchell. "We continue to see the fastest rates of sea level rise in Gulf states like Texas and Louisiana, but many of the East Coast stations are accelerating quite quickly, likely due to patterns of water distribution related to glacial melt from the Greenland ice sheet." Mitchell also notes that most West Coast localities have been fairly stable, despite past predictions that they would increase rapidly. "This has led to some questions about why," she said. Information about the processes most affecting regional sea levels is listed on the Batten School & VIMS website: List of cities, states and processes. Emeritus Professor John Boon launched the sea level report cards in 2018 following the publication of the study Anthropocene Sea Level Change: A History of Recent Trends Observed in the U.S. East, Gulf and West Coast Regions, which showed a notable increase in sea level acceleration rates beginning in 2013-2014.

In a study that will appear in One Earth , the scientists report that, for the highly populated coastal country of Bangladesh,what was once a 100-year event could now strike every 10 years -- or more often -- by the end of the century. In a future where fossil fuels continue to burn as they do today, what was once considered a catastrophic, once-in-a-century storm tide will hit Bangladesh, on average, once per decade. And the kind of storm tides that have occurred every decade or so will likely batter the country's coast more frequently, every few years. Bangladesh is one of the most densely populated countries in the world, with more than 171 million people living in a region roughly the size of New York state. The country has been historically vulnerable to tropical cyclones, as it is a low-lying delta that is easily flooded by storms and experiences a seasonal monsoon. Some of the most destructive floods in the world have occurred in Bangladesh, where it's been increasingly difficult for agricultural economies to recover. The study also finds that Bangladesh will likely experience tropical cyclones that overlap with the months-long monsoon season. Until now, cyclones and the monsoon have occurred at separate times during the year. But as the planet warms, the scientists' modeling shows that cyclones will push into the monsoon season, causing back-to-back flooding events across the country. "Bangladesh is very active in preparing for climate hazards and risks, but the problem is, everything they're doing is more or less based on what they're seeing in the present climate," says study co-author Sai Ravela, principal research scientist in MIT's Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences (EAPS). "We are now seeing an almost tenfold rise inthe recurrence of destructive storm tides almost anywhere you look in Bangladesh. This cannot be ignored. So, we think this is timely, to say they have to pause and revisit how they protect against these storms." Ravela's co-authors are Jiangchao Qiu, a postdoc in EAPS, and Kerry Emanuel, professor emeritus of atmospheric science at MIT. Height of tides In recent years, Bangladesh has invested significantly in storm preparedness, for instance in improving its early-warning system, fortifying village embankments, and increasing access to community shelters. But such preparations have generally been based on the current frequency of storms. In this new study, the MIT team aimed to provide detailed projections of extreme storm tide hazards, which are flooding events where tidal effects amplify cyclone-induced storm surge, in Bangladesh under various climate-warming scenarios and sea-level rise projections. "A lot of these events happen at night, so tides play a really strong role in how much additional water you might get, depending on what the tide is," Ravela explains. To evaluate the risk of storm tide, the team first applied a method of physics-based downscaling, which Emanuel's group first developed over 20 years ago and has been using since to study hurricane activity in different parts of the world. The technique involves a low-resolution model of the global ocean and atmosphere that is embedded with a finer-resolution model that simulates weather patterns as detailed as a single hurricane. The researchers then scatter hurricane "seeds" in a region of interest and run the model forward to observe which seeds grow and make landfall over time. To the downscaled model, the researchers incorporated a hydrodynamical model, which simulates the height of a storm surge, given the pattern and strength of winds at the time of a given storm. For any given simulated storm, the team also tracked the tides, as well as effects of sea level rise, and incorporated this information into a numerical model that calculated the storm tide, or the height of the water, with tidal effects as a storm makes landfall. Extreme overlap With this framework, the scientists simulated tens of thousands of potential tropical cyclones near Bangladesh, under several future climate scenarios, ranging from one that resembles the current day to one in which the world experiences further warming as a result of continued fossil fuel burning. For each simulation, they recorded the maximum storm tides along the coast of Bangladesh and noted the frequency of storm tides of various heights in a given climate scenario. "We can look at the entire bucket of simulations and see, for this storm tide of say, 3 meters, we saw this many storms, and from that you can figure out the relative frequency of that kind of storm," Qiu says. "You can then invert that number to a return period." A return period is the time it takes for a storm of a particular type to make landfall again. A storm that is considered a "100-year event" is typically more powerful and destructive, and in this case, creates more extreme storm tides, and therefore more catastrophic flooding, compared to a 10-year event. From their modeling, Ravela and his colleagues found that under a scenario of increased global warming, the storms that previously were considered 100-year events, producing the highest storm tide values, can recur every decade or less by late-century. They also observed that, toward the end of this century, tropical cyclones in Bangladesh will occur across a broader seasonal window, potentially overlapping in certain years with the seasonal monsoon season. "If the monsoon rain has come in and saturated the soil, a cyclone then comes in and it makes the problem much worse," Ravela says. "People won't have any reprieve between the extreme storm and the monsoon. There are so many compound and cascading effects between the two. And this only emerges because warming happens." Ravela and his colleagues are using their modeling to help experts in Bangladesh better evaluate and prepare for a future of increasing storm risk. And he says that the climate future for Bangladesh is in some ways not unique to this part of the world. "This climate change story that is playing out in Bangladesh in a certain way will be playing out in a different way elsewhere," Ravela notes. "Maybe where you are, the story is about heat stress, or amplifying droughts, or wildfires. The peril is different. But the underlying catastrophe story is not that different." This research is supported in part by the MIT Climate Resilience Early Warning Systems Climate Grand Challenges project, the Jameel Observatory JO-CREWSNet project; MIT Weather and Climate Extremes Climate Grand Challenges project; and Schmidt Sciences, LLC.

A team of researchers led by the University of Leeds has pinpointed a new reason for winter storm clusters such as the trio named Dudley, Eunice and Franklin, which hit the nation within the space of a week in February 2022. The findings which are published today in the journal Communications Earth and Environment reveal the cluster of extreme UK winter storms was connected to stronger winds in the Arctic stratosphere, and the researchers believe this could help weather forecasters to know when there is an increased risk of storm clusters up to a month before they happen. Lead author Dr Ryan Williams, who carried out the research while at the University of Leeds, said: "Our research demonstrates the need to better understand the different drivers of the North Atlantic storm track, such as the state of the stratospheric polar vortex that is potentially predictable several weeks in advance. "Being able to provide early warnings of possible severe weather is all the more pertinent with climate change, as there is evidence that major winter storms will become more intense, exacerbating impacts such as flooding and wind damage." February 2022 was a particularly stormy month in the UK, Ireland, Scandinavia and Germany with several intense cyclones -- rotating low pressure weather systems that often create strong winds and heavy rain. For the first time since 2015 when the UK Met Office began naming impactful cyclones, the UK experienced three named storms in a week -- Dudley, Eunice and Franklin. A total of seven storms were tracked near the UK during that month, the fourth highest number during February since 1979. Four deaths were reported across the UK and Ireland and 1 million homes were affected by power outages lasting up to several days. The estimated insurance bill in the UK and the rest of Europe due to the windstorms was almost four billion euros. Storm Eunice, which impacted the UK on 18th February 2022, was described as a once in a decade event and the most severe since 2014 with record wind gusts for England of 122 miles per hour recorded at the Needles on the Isle of Wight. February 2022 was also characterised by an extremely strong stratospheric polar vortex -- a large spinning mass of cold air in the stratosphere around 15 miles above the Arctic that is prominent during winter months. The researchers were keen to understand the role played by such a strong stratospheric polar vortex (SPV) in driving the risk of the storms, something which had not previously been well explored. They compared seasonal forecasts from January 2022, which showed the unusually strong state of the polar vortex, with those which suggested it would be close to average strength. Examining the properties of UK storms in these contrasting forecasts allowed the influence of the SPV to be identified. They concluded that the strong SPV made it up to three times more likely there would be intense storms affecting the UK and northern Europe during February 2022. Their results also reveal that the strong SPV at that time increased the likelihood of three or more storms reaching the UK in a single week by around 80% compared with when the SPV is normal. Crucially, the researchers say that the signal for a strong SPV was evident from forecasts carried out as early as November 2021 and that spotting these conditions could offer a 'window of opportunity' for enhanced European predictability. Co-author Jeff Knight, the Science Lead in Monthly to Decadal Prediction in the UK Met Office, said: "It's been understood for a while that the Arctic stratosphere can affect the type of winter we get in the UK, but these results show that it can even affect the occurrence of stormy spells within the season. "An intense stratospheric polar vortex can now be recognised as a warning to forecasters of increased risks of damaging storms. This was likely seen in the most recent winter, around the time of storm Eowyn in late January." Professor Amanda Maycock from the School of Earth and Environment who led the project, added: "The stormy conditions and strong stratospheric polar vortex during February 2022 bare parallels to other periods, such as what occurred in February 2020 and even what we have seen at the start of this year. Future work should investigate the connection we have found for other winters."

In the shallow waters of the Lighthouse Reef Atoll, located 80 kilometers off the coast of the small Central American country of Belize, the seabed suddenly drops steeply. Resembling a dark blue eye surrounded by coral reefs, the "Great Blue Hole" is a 125-meter-deep underwater cave with a diameter of 300 meters, which originated thousands of years ago from a karst cave located on a limestone island. During the last ice age, the cave's roof collapsed. As ice sheets melted and global sea level started to rise, the cave was subsequently flooded. In the summer of 2022, a team of scientists -- led by Prof. Eberhard Gischler, head of the Biosedimentology Research Group at Goethe University Frankfurt, and funded by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG) -- transported a drilling platform over the open sea to the "Great Blue Hole." They then proceeded to extract a 30-meter sediment core from the underwater cave, which has been accumulating sediment for approximately 20,000 years. The core was subsequently analyzed by a research team from the universities of Frankfurt, Cologne, Göttingen, Hamburg, and Bern. Coarse layers are a testimony to tropical storms Some 7,200 years ago, the former limestone island of what is now Lighthouse Reef was inundated by the sea. The layered sediments at the bottom of the "Great Blue Hole" serve as archive for extreme weather events of the past 5,700 years, including tropical storms and hurricanes. Dr. Dominik Schmitt, a researcher in the Biosedimentology Research Group and the study's lead author, explains: "Due to the unique environmental conditions -- including oxygen-free bottom water and several stratified water layers -- fine marine sediments could settle largely undisturbed in the 'Great Blue Hole.' Inside the sediment core, they look a bit like tree rings, with the annual layers alternating in color between gray-green and light green depending on organic content." Storm waves and storm surges transported coarse particles from the atoll's eastern reef edge into the "Great Blue Hole," forming distinct sedimentary event layers (tempestites) at the bottom. "The tempestites stand out from the fair-weather gray-green sediments in terms of grain size, composition, and color, which ranges from beige to white," says Schmitt. The research team identified and precisely dated a total of 574 storm events over the past 5,700 years, offering unprecedented insights into climate fluctuations and hurricane cycles in the southwestern Caribbean. Instrumental data and human records available to date had only covered the past 175 years. Rising incidence of storms in the southwestern Caribbean The distribution of storm event layers in the sediment core reveals that the frequency of tropical storms and hurricanes in the southwestern Caribbean has steadily increased over the past six millennia. Schmitt explains: "A key factor has been the southward shift of the equatorial low-pressure zone. Known as the Intertropical Convergence Zone, this zone influences the location of major storm formation areas in the Atlantic and determines how tropical storms and hurricanes move and where they make landfall in the Caribbean." The research team was also able to correlate higher sea-surface temperatures with increased storm activity. Schmitt states: "These shorter-term fluctuations align with five distinct warm and cold climate periods, which also impacted water temperatures in the tropical Atlantic." Climate change results in greater storm activity Over the past six millennia, between four and sixteen tropical storms and hurricanes passed over the "Great Blue Hole" per century. However, the nine storm layers from the past 20 years indicate that extreme weather events will be significantly more frequent in this region in the 21 st century. Gischler warns: "Our results suggest that some 45 tropical storms and hurricanes could pass over this region in our century alone. This would far exceed the natural variability of the past millennia." Natural climate fluctuations cannot account for this increase, the researchers emphasize, pointing instead to the ongoing warming during the Industrial Age, which results in rising ocean temperatures and stronger global La Niña events, thereby creating optimal conditions for frequent storm formation and their rapid intensification.

Scientists at Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health led the study in partnership with researchers at Arizona State University, Harvard University, and the University of Arizona. Until now, there had been a critical knowledge gap about cause-specific flood mortality risks in the U.S. over time, and how risks may vary among groups within the population. The study's findings provide information that could help public health agencies allocate resources. In the U.S., population growth alone is projected to result in an estimated 72 percent increase in the population exposed to floods annually by 2050, before accounting for the effect of climate change in leading to more frequent river, coastal, and flash floods. "Flooding is an urgent public health concern as sea level rise, rapid snowpack melting, and increased storm severity will lead to more destructive and frequent events," says first author Victoria Lynch, PhD, post-doctoral research fellow at Columbia Mailman School. "Our results show that floods were associated with higher death rates for most major causes of death, even for rain- and snow-related floods that are less likely to generate rapid emergency responses." "In the U.S., floods have a devastating effect on society, yet a comprehensive assessment of their continuing health impacts had been lacking,"says Robbie M. Parks, assistant professor in Environmental Health Sciences at Columbia Mailman School and senior author. "Our study is a first major step in better understanding how floods may affect deaths, which provides an essential foundation for improving resilience to climate-related disasters across the days, weeks, months, and years after they wreak destruction." After collecting 35.6 million U.S. death records from 2001 to 2018, the researchers used a statistical model to calculate how death rates changed in three-month periods following large floods when compared to equivalent periods in normal conditions. Residents of 2,711 counties, covering over 75 percent of the U.S. population, experienced at least one large flood during the study period. Heavy rain was the most common cause of large flood events with the next most common cause due to snowmelt in the Midwest and tropical cyclones in the southeast. The researchers found the largest overall increases in injury death rates among older people (24.9 percent) and females (21.2 percent) during the month of tropical storm/hurricane-related flooding,with increases in death rates associated with heavy rain-related flooding for infectious diseases (3.2 percent) and cardiovascular diseases (2.1 percent). Snowmelt-related floods were associated with higher death rates for respiratory diseases (22.3 percent), neuropsychiatric conditions (15.9 percent), and cardiovascular diseases (8.9 percent). The rise in infectious diseases is likely related to disruptions to drinking water and sewage infrastructure that can lead to waterborne disease transmission. Chronic and neuropsychiatric conditions may relate to stress from persistent flood-related disruptions. Socioeconomic factors that drive health outcomes in communities vulnerable to floods, as well as residents' ability to evacuate during emergencies and respond to their aftermath, may also play important roles. "The majority of our understanding of flood-related health impacts comes from major events like Hurricane Katrina or Harvey that, despite their devastation, are a sample of a larger phenomenon," says Jonathan Sullivan, assistant professor in Geography, Development, and Environment at University of Arizona and co-author. "Our study shows that even floods caused by snowmelt or heavy rain, each uniquely driven by changes to climate and development, elevate mortality months after the fact providing critical knowledge of how to manage and adapt to floods." Previous research on climate and health by the authors of this paper has found elevated death rates after tropical cyclones in the U.S., including disproportionate increases in excess deaths in socially vulnerable communities of color, and that tropical cyclones are associated with the spread of waterborne infectious diseases. Additional co-authors are Aaron Flores, Arizona State University; Sarika Aggarwal and Rachel C. Nethery, Harvard Chan School of Public Health; and Marianthi-Anna Kioumourtzoglou, Anne E Nigra, and Xicheng Xie, Columbia Mailman School of Public Health. The study was supported by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (grants ES007322, ES033742, ES009089, AG093975, ES007142).

MIT scientists have developed a method that generates satellite imagery from the future to depict how a region would look after a potential flooding event. The method combines a generative artificial intelligence model with a physics-based flood model to create realistic, birds-eye-view images of a region, showing where flooding is likely to occur given the strength of an oncoming storm. As a test case, the team applied the method to Houston and generated satellite images depicting what certain locations around the city would look like after a storm comparable to Hurricane Harvey, which hit the region in 2017. The team compared these generated images with actual satellite images taken of the same regions after Harvey hit. They also compared AI-generated images that did not include a physics-based flood model. The team's physics-reinforced method generated satellite images of future flooding that were more realistic and accurate. The AI-only method, in contrast, generated images of flooding in places where flooding is not physically possible. The team's method is a proof-of-concept, meant to demonstrate a case in which generative AI models can generate realistic, trustworthy content when paired with a physics-based model. In order to apply the method to other regions to depict flooding from future storms, it will need to be trained on many more satellite images to learn how flooding would look in other regions. "The idea is: One day, we could use this before a hurricane, where it provides an additional visualization layer for the public," says Björn Lütjens, a postdoc in MIT's Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, who led the research while he was a doctoral student in MIT's Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AeroAstro). "One of the biggest challenges is encouraging people to evacuate when they are at risk. Maybe this could be another visualization to help increase that readiness." To illustrate the potential of the new method, which they have dubbed the "Earth Intelligence Engine," the team has made it available as an online resource for others to try. The researchers report their results today in the journal IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing . The study's MIT co-authors include Brandon Leschchinskiy; Aruna Sankaranarayanan; and Dava Newman, professor of AeroAstro and director of the MIT Media Lab; along with collaborators from multiple institutions. Generative adversarial images The new study is an extension of the team's efforts to apply generative AI tools to visualize future climate scenarios. "Providing a hyper-local perspective of climate seems to be the most effective way to communicate our scientific results," says Newman, the study's senior author. "People relate to their own zip code, their local environment where their family and friends live. Providing local climate simulations becomes intuitive, personal, and relatable." For this study, the authors use a conditional generative adversarial network, or GAN, a type of machine learning method that can generate realistic images using two competing, or "adversarial," neural networks. The first "generator" network is trained on pairs of real data, such as satellite images before and after a hurricane. The second "discriminator" network is then trained to distinguish between the real satellite imagery and the one synthesized by the first network. Each network automatically improves its performance based on feedback from the other network. The idea, then, is that such an adversarial push and pull should ultimately produce synthetic images that are indistinguishable from the real thing. Nevertheless, GANs can still produce "hallucinations," or factually incorrect features in an otherwise realistic image that shouldn't be there. "Hallucinations can mislead viewers," says Lütjens, who began to wonder whether such hallucinations could be avoided, such that generative AI tools can be trusted to help inform people, particularly in risk-sensitive scenarios. "We were thinking: How can we use these generative AI models in a climate-impact setting, where having trusted data sources is so important?" Flood hallucinations In their new work, the researchers considered a risk-sensitive scenario in which generative AI is tasked with creating satellite images of future flooding that could be trustworthy enough to inform decisions of how to prepare and potentially evacuate people out of harm's way. Typically, policymakers can get an idea of where flooding might occur based on visualizations in the form of color-coded maps. These maps are the final product of a pipeline of physical models that usually begins with a hurricane track model, which then feeds into a wind model that simulates the pattern and strength of winds over a local region. This is combined with a flood or storm surge model that forecasts how wind might push any nearby body of water onto land. A hydraulic model then maps out where flooding will occur based on the local flood infrastructure and generates a visual, color-coded map of flood elevations over a particular region. "The question is: Can visualizations of satellite imagery add another level to this, that is a bit more tangible and emotionally engaging than a color-coded map of reds, yellows, and blues, while still being trustworthy?" Lütjens says. The team first tested how generative AI alone would produce satellite images of future flooding. They trained a GAN on actual satellite images taken by satellites as they passed over Houston before and after Hurricane Harvey. When they tasked the generator to produce new flood images of the same regions, they found that the images resembled typical satellite imagery, but a closer look revealed hallucinations in some images, in the form of floods where flooding should not be possible (for instance, in locations at higher elevation). To reduce hallucinations and increase the trustworthiness of the AI-generated images, the team paired the GAN with a physics-based flood model that incorporates real, physical parameters and phenomena, such as an approaching hurricane's trajectory, storm surge, and flood patterns. With this physics-reinforced method, the team generated satellite images around Houston that depict the same flood extent, pixel by pixel, as forecasted by the flood model. "We show a tangible way to combine machine learning with physics for a use case that's risk-sensitive, which requires us to analyze the complexity of Earth's systems and project future actions and possible scenarios to keep people out of harm's way," Newman says. "We can't wait to get our generative AI tools into the hands of decision-makers at the local community level, which could make a significant difference and perhaps save lives." The research was supported, in part, by the MIT Portugal Program, the DAF-MIT Artificial Intelligence Accelerator, NASA, and Google Cloud.

Official government statistics record only the number of individuals killed during these storms, which are together called "tropical cyclones." Usually, these direct deaths, which average 24 per storm in official estimates, occur through drowning or some other type of trauma. But the new analysis, published October 2 in Nature , reveals a larger, hidden death toll in hurricanes' aftermath. "In any given month, people are dying earlier than they would have if the storm hadn't hit their community," said senior study author Solomon Hsiang, a professor of environmental social sciences at the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability . "A big storm will hit, and there's all these cascades of effects where cities are rebuilding or households are displaced or social networks are broken. These cascades have serious consequences for public health." Hsiang and lead study author Rachel Young estimate an average U.S. tropical cyclone indirectly causes 7,000 to 11,000 excess deaths. All told, they estimate tropical storms since 1930 have contributed to between 3.6 million and 5.2 million deaths in the U.S. -- more than all deaths nationwide from motor vehicle accidents, infectious diseases, or battle deaths in wars during the same period. Official government statistics put the total death toll from these storms at about 10,000 people. Hurricane impacts underestimated The new estimates are based on statistical analysis of data from the 501 tropical cyclones that hit the Atlantic and Gulf coasts from 1930 to 2015, and mortality rates for various populations within each state just before and after each cyclone. The researchers expanded on ideas from a 2014 study from Hsiang showing that tropical cyclones slow economic growth for 15 years, and on a 2018 Harvard study finding that Hurricane Maria caused nearly 5,000 deaths in the three months after the storm hit Puerto Rico -- nearly 70 times the official government count. "When we started out, we thought that we might see a delayed effect of tropical cyclones on mortality maybe for six months or a year, similar to heat waves," said Young, a postdoctoral scholar at the University of California Berkeley, where she began working on the study as a master's student in Hsiang's lab before he joined Stanford's faculty in July 2024. The results show deaths due to hurricanes persist at much higher rates not only for months but years after floodwaters recede and public attention moves on. Uneven health burdens Young and Hsiang's research is the first to suggest that hurricanes are an important driver for the distribution of overall mortality risk across the country. While the study finds that more than 3 in 100 deaths nationwide are related to tropical cyclones, the burden is far higher for certain groups, with Black individuals three times more likely to die after a hurricane than white individuals. This finding puts stark numbers to concerns that many Black communities have raised for years about unequal treatment and experiences they face after natural disasters. The researchers estimate 25% of infant deaths and 15% of deaths among people aged 1 to 44 in the U.S. are related to tropical cyclones. For these groups, Young and Hsiang write, the added risk from tropical cyclones makes a big difference in overall mortality risk because the group starts from a low baseline mortality rate. "These are infants born years after a tropical cyclone, so they couldn't have even experienced the event themselves in utero," Young said. "This points to a longer-term economic and maternal health story, where mothers might not have as many resources even years after a disaster than they would have in a world where they never experienced a tropical cyclone." Adapting in future hazard zones The long, slow surge of cyclone-related deaths tends to be much higher in places that historically have experienced fewer hurricanes. "Because this long-run effect on mortality has never been documented before, nobody on the ground knew that they should be adapting for this and nobody in the medical community has planned a response," Young said. The study's results could inform governmental and financial decisions around plans for adapting to climate change, building coastal climate resilience, and improving disaster management, as tropical cyclones are predicted to become more intense with climate change. "With climate change, we expect that tropical cyclones are going to potentially become more hazardous, more damaging, and they're going to change who they hit," said Young. Toward solutions Building on the Nature study, Hsiang's Global Policy Laboratory at Stanford is now working to understand why tropical storms and hurricanes cause these deaths over 15 years. The research group integrates economics, data science, and social sciences to answer policy questions that are key to managing planetary resources, often related to impacts from climate change. With mortality risk from hurricanes, the challenge is to disentangle the complex chains of events that follow a cyclone and can ultimately affect human health -- and then evaluate possible interventions. These events can be so separated from the initial hazard that even affected individuals and their families may not see the connection. For example, Hsiang and Young write, individuals might use retirement savings to repair property damage, reducing their ability to pay for future health care. Family members might move away, weakening support networks that could be critical for good health down the line. Public spending may shift to focus on immediate recovery needs, at the expense of investments that could otherwise promote long-run health. "Some solutions might be as simple as communicating to families and governments that, a few years after you allocate money for recovery, maybe you want to think about additional savings for health care-related expenses, particularly for the elderly, communities of color, and mothers or expectant mothers," Young said.

In 2018, Hurricane Michael, a Category 5 storm, wreaked havoc in Florida as it made landfall in the United States. It was strongest recorded to hit the Florida Panhandle with winds of nearly 161 miles per hour and storm surge reaching heights between 9 and 14 feet. Mexico Beach, Panama City Beach and Cape San Blas experienced the highest level of devastation. Several counties in the hardest hit areas reported that 100% of their customer accounts were out of electricity for several days. Eight of the 14 counties in the area are classified as rural and five of these counties have poverty rates above 20%. At the household level, loss of electric power can have ripple effects for families without a means to salvage and replace refrigerated items. After a disaster, assessing damage quickly is crucial for initiating search and rescue and prioritizing the restoration of utilities. However, inconsistent public data on power outages and a lack of standardization hinder emergency response efforts. This is particularly challenging in diverse, disadvantaged or rural areas. To unravel the complex effects of Hurricane Michael on the Florida Panhandle, researchers from Florida Atlantic University and collaborators combined remote sensing data, official outage records, and census information to provide an in-depth view of the initial damage, the restoration process, and its impact on vulnerable populations. They examined the correlation between damage levels and power restoration rates by overlaying estimated percent recovery derived from NASA's Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) Day/Night Band (DNB) (also known as nighttime lightdata) with a reclassification of NOAA's National Geodetic Survey Emergency Response Imagery. This imagery was categorized into various types of land damage, including debris, sand, water, trees, barren land, and roofs around Mexico Beach. Results of the study, published in the journal Remote Sensing , reveal notable differences in power-restoration rates between urbanized and rural areas and between disadvantaged and more affluent communities. The findings indicate that block groups with higher proportions of minorities, multi-family housing units, rural locations, and households receiving public assistance experienced slower restoration of power compared to urban and more affluent neighborhoods. Through hotspot analysis, significant variations in power-restoration rates were highlighted, with urban areas, particularly those surrounding Tallahassee, demonstrating notably higher rates compared to rural regions and areas heavily affected by structural damage, like Mexico Beach. "Delayed recovery in key infrastructure, such as the power grid, will further devastate these communities. Operation of air conditioning units, food storage, entertainment, working, schooling and even drinking water for households with wells, all rely on electricity," said Diana Mitsova, Ph.D., senior author and chair and professor of the Department of Urban and Regional Planning within FAU's Charles E. Schmidt College of Science. "Consequently, power loss and delayed restoration have a profound negative impact on households and families, ranging from health to economic productivity." For the study, researchers used outage data averaged over a week from the Florida Public Service Commission and NASA's VIIRS DNB data. They also used spatial lag models to study how the speed of power restoration related to socioeconomic status. Researchers differentiated between urban and rural counties using a classification scheme from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Center for Health Statistics. Restoration rates and curves were developed for 14 counties to compare power-restoration patterns between these regions. They also aggregated electrical service loss and restoration rates at the block group level using data from the 2013-17 American Community Survey. "Our findings further confirm that insufficient post-disaster recovery disproportionally affects households and families in disadvantaged neighborhoods and rural communities," said Mitsova. "These communities tend to be vulnerable to natural disasters and often suffer more severe damage compared to other areas." In addition to underscoring the importance of revisiting building codes and fostering new mutual aid agreements between rural electrical cooperatives and larger entities within and outside Florida, findings from this study also highlight the need for more focused scholarship on disparate disaster impacts on smaller rural communities, coastal and agricultural ecosystems and policy solutions to address these disparities. "Our study emphasizes the importance of integrating socioeconomic factors into disaster preparedness and recovery-planning efforts, stressing the need for targeted interventions to mitigate disparities in recovery times following natural disasters," said Mitsova. "Such initiatives and scholarship hold promise for addressing future challenges and enhancing the resilience of predominantly rural and underserved communities."

The collaborative research team focused on a specific type of atmospheric wave, known as Convectively Coupled Kelvin Waves, (CCKWs), which are massive waves over 1,000-miles long that travel in Earth's atmosphere along the equator and significantly influence global rainfall patterns. The study, published June 1, 2024, in the American Geophysical Union's Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , provides researchers with a new way to study the behavior and attributes of these Kelvin waves in weather forecast models. "Our findings suggest that improving the simulation of these Kelvin waves in weather models could enhance the accuracy of predictions for other high-impact weather features," said Quinton Lawton, a recent graduate of the Rosenstiel School's Department of Atmospheric Sciences and a lead author of the study. "This has the potential to provide communities, especially those in tropical regions, with more lead time and readiness for destructive weather." Utilizing NCAR's high-performance computing system and cutting-edge weather models including the Model for Prediction Across Scales -- Atmosphere (MPAS-A) and ECMWF's Integrated Forecast System (IFS), the team simulated several Kelvin waves from 2021. One notable Kelvin wave over the Atlantic Ocean was linked to the formation of Tropical Storm Victor. The study found that current weather forecast models poorly simulated an Atlantic Ocean CCKW, indicating a need for future improvements in weather forecasting systems to better predict these waves and, consequently, other extreme weather events. The researchers introduced a novel methodology for modifying the strength of Kelvin waves in weather forecast models. With this new tool, researchers will be able to better quantify the characteristics and impacts of Kelvin waves, enhancing our understanding of how these waves are represented in weather forecast models. Kelvin waves are now recognized for their role in increasing the likelihood of hurricane formation and triggering extreme rainfall events. In a previous study by Rosenstiel School scientists Lawton and Sharan Majumdar published in 2023, they explain how these waves can encourage tropical cyclone formation in the Atlantic. This study represents the culmination of two years of collaborative research, originating from the lead student author's PhD dissertation at the University of Miami. The work brings together expertise and resources from UM, NCAR, and ECMWF to push the boundaries of meteorological science. "The research is a step towards better understanding and predicting the tropical atmosphere," said study coauthor Sharan Majumdar, a professor of atmospheric sciences at the Rosenstiel School. "The study also highlights the need for further research into why current models struggle with accurately simulating these waves."

Scientists at the U.S. National Science Foundation National Center for Atmospheric Research (NSF NCAR) analyzed 2017 Twitter (now X) data related to two hurricanes -- Harvey and Irma. The researchers found that forecast information communicated in the early stages of storm development, when the threat posed by a hurricane is uncertain, sets the stage for how people react to subsequent warning messages. The research team also identified ways authoritative sources, such as the National Weather Service, broadcast meteorologists, and emergency managers, can better engage at-risk community members. "When we began this research, a lot of work had been done analyzing Twitter data in the post-disaster space, and we were interested in how people were responding to weather forecast information in earlier stages, especially as predictions change," said NSF NCAR scientist Rebecca Morss, lead author of the Hurricane Harvey paper. "Twitter provided a natural laboratory for us to look at what communications people are responding to and what information they are sharing. This kind of research can help the meteorological community learn what are the most important things to communicate and how to improve that messaging." The research was supported by NSF NCAR and funded in part by NOAA and a grant from NSF. Risk Information Ecosystem Harvey and Irma both occurred in 2017, but the two storms behaved very differently from one another. Harvey was an atypical hurricane that rapidly intensified and then lingered along the Texas coast for a few days, leading to devastating flooding in the Houston region. Whereas Irma was forecast well in advance of making landfall and followed a more typical movement pattern over land, leading to significant risks from strong winds and storm surge. Combined, the two storms provided complementary data about the different types of hurricane risks that need to be communicated amid varying levels of uncertainty. Twitter offered the NSF NCAR researchers a detailed log of how people were sharing and reacting to information in real time. The research team developed a dataset of tweets that was relevant to each hurricane and focused on tweets posted by authoritative sources. To evaluate how the tweets communicated information about the storms to those in harm's way, the researchers categorized tweets based on the type of visuals used and looked for patterns in what image types were retweeted and interacted with the most. Additionally, the researchers examined the content of replies to forecast and warning tweets to explore how people in at-risk areas make sense of and respond to a hurricane's evolving threat. "In early stages of the threat, we could see a really clear cadence that every six hours there would be an uptick in Twitter conversation about the hurricanes," said NSF NCAR scientist Robert Prestley, lead author of the Hurricane Irma paper. "This was driven by the National Hurricane Center putting out updated forecast information. That information would then be redistributed by broadcast meteorologists, emergency managers, news media, and weather enthusiasts, and the conversation would grow from there. It really highlighted the key role of the National Weather Service in leading this communication." Morss and Prestley also observed that the role of the national and local National Weather Service (NWS) offices shifted over the course of a hurricane. As the storm developed, NWS centers such as the National Hurricane Center played the leading role in spreading information, but as the storms began to impact communities, local NWS offices took the lead in generating locally relevant forecast and warning content. Viral Visuals The research identified several types of images that were commonly used to convey information about the threat of a hurricane. Of these, the "cone of uncertainty" was the most retweeted graphic. The cone of uncertainty shows the current location of a tropical storm as well as the probable track of the storm's center with a cone shape around it that represents the uncertainty of the track based on historical errors. Previous research has shown that cone images have several limitations such as a lack of information about the risks to those outside of the cone, which can lead to people falsely believing areas outside of it are not at risk. "There's a clear need for better uncertainty visualizations, especially in the forecast and warning period when people are looking for information, but there's not yet enough certainty to say specifically where or what the impacts will be," Prestley said. "The cone is not necessarily equipped to do that. The question is how to maintain the visibility of an image people are accustomed to while more effectively communicating hurricane risks to different populations." The researchers also identified ways image content varied across the two hurricanes. For instance during Hurricane Harvey, tweets that included images highlighting heavy rain and flooding were highly retweeted. The high engagement with those tweets demonstrates the value of authoritative sources tweaking their communication to emphasize the different risks posed by individual storms. The image type least interacted with was watch and warning imagery. These images include information about watches and warnings issued by NWS for hazards like flash floods, high winds, or tornadoes. Often these images are generated by automated programs and include identical or similarly formatted text and visualizations. Many of these watches and warnings are issued for narrow geographic areas over short time-frames, which could explain why most of them have few retweets. Morss and Prestley recommend more research into how to improve communication of watch and warning information on social media, including how and when to use automated tweets to rapidly disseminate more user friendly information. Although several things about Twitter have changed since the NSF NCAR research team conducted their studies, the research conducted by Morss, Prestley, and colleagues using the platform built a new understanding of how people respond to evolving information about natural disaster threats. Currently, the researchers are using additional research methods, including surveys before, during, and after weather events, to study the way people react to pending natural disasters. The Twitter studies helped shape the questions used in this ongoing research. The knowledge gained can help professional weather communicators improve how they use social media networks as a vibrant resource for improving disaster communication.

The researchers have implemented 3D visualization technology to identify the potential outcomes of hurricane flooding before it occurs. According to researchers, severe weather has been increasing over the last several years due to global climate change. If severe storms and flooding continue to increase in the future, implementing 3D visualization based on real-time weather forecasts could result in improved safety and less damage-inflicted costs. The 3D modeling technique also allows researchers to examine the effects of damage-preventing infrastructure, such as the proposed Galveston "Ike Dike," a dike designed to shield Galveston Island from future storm surge and flood events. Using Galveston Island as an example, researchers used 3D visualization to model the damage that would occur to residential buildings as a result of hurricanes of varying intensities. They also modeled damage with preventative infrastructure -- the "Ike Dike" -- in place. An advantage of 3D visualization over other damage modeling methods is that it allows researchers to model specific buildings, accounting for basements, back entrances, and windows. By identifying a residential building's first-floor elevation level, researchers can predict the physical and financial damage that a hurricane will cause to the specific building. "3D visualization of hurricanes and storm surges allows us to understand how flooding will impact our coastal communities by allowing us to vividly see how each building and road might be impacted by a given flood," said Dr. Xinyue Ye, the Harold Adams Endowed Professor of Landscape Architecture and Urban Planning and affiliated faculty member in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the Department of Multidisciplinary Engineering, the Department of Geography, and the Section of Visual Computing & Interactive Media. Faculty collaborators on the project include Dr. David Retchless, associate professor in the Department of Marine and Coastal Environmental Science at Texas A&M University at Galveston, Dr. Galen Newman, professor and head of the Department of Landscape Architecture and Urban Planning and the Nicole and Kevin Youngblood Professor of Residential Land Development at Texas A&M, and Dr. Nick Duffield, the Royce E. Wisenbaker Professor I in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and director of the Texas A&M Institute of Data Science. Critical Information For Homeowners Since 3D visualization highlights the potential damages hurricane flooding may cause, it can give homeowners a better understanding of what to invest in as far as insurance and preventative infrastructure. This technology also creates an increased community awareness around potential outcomes of hurricanes and flooding. "Having used Galveston as an example, the next step would be to expand that to other coastal communities in Texas," Ye noted. "In this study, we mainly used residential houses, but we can expand it to other business properties as well." Effective use of 3D models can protect Texas residents. By implementing this technology on other coastal communities or community buildings, such as schools and stores, researchers can help residents and officials create a plan for hurricane season. As real-time weather forecasts are implemented into the models, researchers may be able to determine when evacuation is necessary and use this data to alert residents. "3D visualization serves as a universal language, bridging diverse disciplines and fostering communication between academia and the general public," said Ye, who also serves as the director of the Texas A&M Center for Geospatial Sciences, Applications, and Technology and the founding director of Urban AI Lab at the Texas A&M Institute of Data Science. Duffield adds that this project shows how the work at the intersection between geospatial data science and visualization can raise awareness for individuals, communities and government on the consequences of extreme weather and make informed planning decisions for responses. This study combines the expertise of researchers in multiple fields, including computer engineering, landscape architecture, urban planning, geography, and marine and coastal environmental science. The positive impacts of this research highlight the importance of collaboration between computational science and domain-specific disciplines.

In the aftermath of a disaster, rapidly assessing damage is critical for rescue, recovery and emergency planning. Damage assessments are typically conducted through field reconnaissance deployments, which can be labor-intensive, costly and risky. Moreover, field-based emergency response assessments can be hindered by delays and other setbacks due to the severity of the damage and the inability to access the hardest hit areas. Using remote sensing technology, Florida Atlantic University researchers have developed a novel technique that provides rapid, high-resolution assessments of detailed damage after a hurricane. Using aerial imagery data and LiDAR, they identified the hardest-hit areas of Southwest Florida's Estero Island and estimated the extent of structural damage. Researchers also compared pre- and post-storm structural or morphological changes to the beach. The study is the first to apply an advanced multi-faceted approach that links damage assessment to post-storm change in the structure of barrier islands. Results of the study, published in the Journal of Marine Science and Engineering , identified a total of 2,427 structures on Estero Island that were impacted by Hurricane Ian, with 170 structures suffering extensive damage. A single store was the only structure in the study area classified as "not affected." Using data from the Lee County tax appraiser, researchers estimated the total assessed value of the heavily damaged structures at more than $200 million. Overall, 734 buildings had 30 to 50 percent structural damage, the majority of which were single-family and multi-unit residences. Researchers identified 158 buildings that were severely damaged with partial or complete roof failure. The highest percentage of damaged structures occurred on the central and northern portions of the island, where most of the structures were single-family and multi-family residences. Most of the structures that experienced 0 to 30 percent damage were classified as low-rise condominiums (three stories or less), commercial shopping centers and stores. Among the "severely damaged" and "destroyed" structures were seven mobile home subdivisions. "Employing this advanced technology of aerial imagery and airborne LiDAR enabled us to collect extensive data from Hurricane Ian's aftermath and analyze large-scale datasets rather quickly," said Tiffany Roberts Briggs, Ph.D., senior author, chair and an associate professor in the Department of Geosciences within FAU's Charles E. Schmidt College of Science. The 2,427 structures were built between 1963 to 2019. The buildings in the areas where less damage was observed were built between 1963 and 1981. Similarly, in the areas of heavy damage, the majority of the buildings were built between 1963 and 1981. The spatial distribution of ground elevation and year built indicated no apparent trends associated with these two variables. "We found no correlation between the ground elevation or year built for the extent of damages in this analysis, which emphasizes the role of the extreme inundation and importance of other factors contributing to vulnerability," said Roberts Briggs. "Results from our study can help improve disaster planning by developing new policies and guidelines for coastal development in some of the most vulnerable and storm-exposed areas." Areas associated with little to no damage were spatially clustered in the southern and central portion of the island, with most structures concentrated on the landward side of the barrier island. "The southern portion of Estero Island contains multiple saltwater marshes," said Leanne Hauptman, first author and a Ph.D. student in FAU's Department of Geosciences. "Because of these saltwater marshes, storm-wave energy may been substantially dissipated by friction by the time the waves reached the barrier interior, potentially lessening the impact on the structures in that area." Findings also showed substantial post-storm debris and sand deposition across the entire island, and a notable deposition of sediment across the roadways and on the backside of the barrier, which is not readily returned seaward to the beach under post-storm conditions. Ponding water also was found hundreds of meters inland near buildings and other structures, providing evidence of the extent of inundation resulting from the storm. "Although our study focused on Estero Island, this new remote sensing approach is generalizable," said Diana Mitsova, Ph.D., corresponding author, chair and professor, FAU Department of Urban and Regional Planning within the Charles E. Schmidt College of Science and an affiliate professor, FAU Department of Geosciences. "As this technology continues to advance and becomes more readily available, it will offer a broad range of high-resolution coverage that can help prioritize emergency response efforts immediately following catastrophic natural disasters and other events." For the study, analysis of beach morphology was conducted by creating profile graphs to visualize elevation changes over a continuous distance. To measure structural damage, researchers use LiDAR tools to extract building footprints and building heights pre- and post-storm. Building footprints were overlaid on the post-imagery to estimate the total number of damaged buildings as well as the level of damage to each structure.

Anthropogenic climate change poses a major risk to coastlines due to rising sea level and increasingly severe tropical storms. This threatens not only living populations but also historic and archaeological sites. Mitigating damage requires accurate assessments of risks, but most predictive models focus on projected sea level rise while most physical observations focus on storm surge events. In this study, Howland and Thompson use the Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) model developed by the National Weather Service to estimate risks of storm surges along the coast of the US state of Georgia. The low-lying coastal plain of Georgia hosts thousands of Native American cultural sites, historic colonial sites, and more, representing the physical cultural heritage of the region. This study finds over 4,200 such sites are potentially at risk of inundation from the storm surge of a Category 5 hurricane at present-day sea level. By the year 2100, nearly 5,000 sites could be flooded by severe hurricanes, with over 2,000 threatened by even relatively weak tropical storms. These numbers are more than ten times the estimates from previous models accounting only for sea level rise. These results underline the importance of accounting for storm surge events along with rising sea level when assessing risks to coastal sites. The authors hope these projections will help cultural heritage managers to facilitate protection and mitigation efforts in Georgia, and they note that a similar modeling approach could be applied to coastal environments around the world. Matthew D. Howland adds: "This study shows that the archaeological resources of the Georgia coast are at great risk of damage from potential storm surge at any time. Up until now, archaeologists have generally underestimated the threat to coastal cultural heritage since they have been thinking of long term averages of sea level rise rather than the kind of dramatic disaster events that can happen in Georgia and the Atlantic Coast, like Hurricane Michael in 2018." Victor D. Thompson adds: "The Georgia coast's cultural heritage spans millennia, from the earliest Native American villages of Ancestral Muskogean people to its colonial missions and later plantations. These cultural sites are increasingly being impacted by storms and sea level change which threaten the material link to the broader histories of Native peoples, the enslaved, and their place in American history."

But as increasing ocean temperatures contribute to ever more intense and destructive hurricanes, climate scientists Michael Wehner of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (Berkeley Lab) and James Kossin of the First Street Foundation wondered whether the open-ended Category 5 is sufficient to communicate the risk of hurricane damage in a warming climate. So they investigated and detailed their extensive research in a new article published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), where they also introduce a hypothetical Category 6 to the Saffir-Simpson Wind Scale, which would encompass storms with wind speeds greater than 192 mph. "Our motivation is to reconsider how the open-endedness of the Saffir-Simpson Scale can lead to underestimation of risk, and, in particular, how this underestimation becomes increasingly problematic in a warming world," said Wehner, who has spent his career studying the behavior of extreme weather events in a changing climate and to what extent human influence has contributed to individual events. According to Wehner, anthropogenic global warming has significantly increased surface ocean and tropospheric air temperatures in regions where hurricanes, tropical cyclones, and typhoons form and propagate, providing additional heat energy for storm intensification. When the team performed a historical data analysis of hurricanes from 1980 to 2021, they found five storms that would have been classified as Category 6, and all of them occurred in the last nine years of record. They determined a hypothetical upper bound for Category 5 hurricanes by looking at the expanding range of wind speeds between the lower-category storms. Hurricanes, tropical storms, and typhoons are essentially the same weather phenomenon; their name difference is purely geographical: storms in the North Atlantic and Northeast Pacific Oceans are called hurricanes, events in the Northwest Pacific Ocean are called typhoons, and occurrences in the South Pacific and Indian Oceans are called tropical cyclones. In addition to studying the past, the researchers analyzed simulations to explore how warming climates would impact hurricane intensification. Their models showed that with two degrees Celsius of global warming above pre-industrial levels, the risk of Category 6 storms increases by up to 50% near the Philippines and doubles in the Gulf of Mexico and that the highest risk of these storms is in Southeast Asia, the Philippines, and the Gulf of Mexico. "Even under the relatively low global warming targets of the Paris Agreement, which seeks to limit global warming to just 1.5°C above preindustrial temperatures by the end of this century, the increased chances of Category 6 storms are substantial in these simulations," said Wehner. "Tropical cyclone risk messaging is a very active topic, and changes in messaging are necessary to better inform the public about inland flooding and storm surge, phenomena that a wind-based scale is only tangentially relevant to. While adding a 6th category to the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale would not solve that issue, it could raise awareness about the perils of the increased risk of major hurricanes due to global warming," said Kossin. "Our results are not meant to propose changes to this scale, but rather to raise awareness that the wind-hazard risk from storms presently designated as Category 5 has increased and will continue to increase under climate change."

When hurricanes make landfall, strong winds whip up salty ocean waters that generate storm surge in coastal regions. As the storms move over land, torrential rainfall can induce further flooding inland. When multiple flood sources such as storm surge and rainfall interact, they can compound a hurricane's hazards, leading to significantly more flooding than would result from any one source alone. The new study introduces a physics-based method for predicting how the risk of such complex, compound flooding may evolve under a warming climate in coastal cities. One example of compound flooding's impact is the aftermath from Hurricane Sandy in 2012. The storm made landfall on the East Coast of the United States as heavy winds whipped up a towering storm surge that combined with rainfall-driven flooding in some areas to cause historic and devastating floods across New York and New Jersey. In their study, the MIT team applied the new compound flood-modeling method to New York City to predict how climate change may influence the risk of compound flooding from Sandy-like hurricanes over the next decades. They found that, in today's climate, a Sandy-level compound flooding event will likely hit New York City every 150 years. By midcentury, a warmer climate will drive up the frequency of such flooding, to every 60 years. At the end of the century, destructive Sandy-like floods will deluge the city every 30 years -- a fivefold increase compared to the present climate. "Long-term average damages from weather hazards are usually dominated by the rare, intense events like Hurricane Sandy," says study co-author Kerry Emanuel, professor emeritus of atmospheric science at MIT. "It is important to get these right." While these are sobering projections, the researchers hope the flood forecasts can help city planners prepare and protect against future disasters. "Our methodology equips coastal city authorities and policymakers with essential tools to conduct compound flooding risk assessments from hurricanes in coastal cities at a detailed, granular level, extending to each street or building, in both current and future decades," says study author Ali Sarhadi, a postdoc in MIT's Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences. The team's open-access study appears online today in the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society . Co-authors include Raphaël Rousseau-Rizzi at MIT's Lorenz Center, Kyle Mandli at Columbia University, Jeffrey Neal at the University of Bristol, Michael Wiper at the Charles III University of Madrid, and Monika Feldmann at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne. The seeds of floods To forecast a region's flood risk, weather modelers typically look to the past. Historical records contain measurements of previous hurricanes' wind speeds, rainfall, and spatial extent, which scientists use to predict where and how much flooding may occur with coming storms. But Sarhadi believes that the limitations and brevity of these historical records are insufficient for predicting future hurricanes' risks. "Even if we had lengthy historical records, they wouldn't be a good guide for future risks because of climate change," he says. "Climate change is changing the structural characteristics, frequency, intensity, and movement of hurricanes, and we cannot rely on the past." Sarhadi and his colleagues instead looked to predict a region's risk of hurricane flooding in a changing climate using a physics-based risk assessment methodology. They first paired simulations of hurricane activity with coupled ocean and atmospheric models over time. With the hurricane simulations, developed originally by Emanuel, the researchers virtually scatter tens of thousands of "seeds" of hurricanes into a simulated climate. Most seeds dissipate, while a few grow into category-level storms, depending on the conditions of the ocean and atmosphere. When the team drives these hurricane simulations with climate models of ocean and atmospheric conditions under certain global temperature projections, they can see how hurricanes change, for instance in terms of intensity, frequency, and size, under past, current, and future climate conditions. The team then sought to precisely predict the level and degree of compound flooding from future hurricanes in coastal cities. The researchers first used rainfall models to simulate rain intensity for a large number of simulated hurricanes, then applied numerical models to hydraulically translate that rainfall intensity into flooding on the ground during landfalling of hurricanes, given information about a region such as its surface and topography characteristics. They also simulated the same hurricanes' storm surges, using hydrodynamic models to translate hurricanes' maximum wind speed and sea level pressure into surge height in coastal areas. The simulation further assessed the propagation of ocean waters into coastal areas, causing coastal flooding. Then, the team developed a numerical hydrodynamic model to predict how two sources of hurricane-induced flooding, such as storm surge and rain-driven flooding, would simultaneously interact through time and space, as simulated hurricanes make landfall in coastal regions such as New York City, in both current and future climates. "There's a complex, nonlinear hydrodynamic interaction between saltwater surge-driven flooding and freshwater rainfall-driven flooding, that forms compound flooding that a lot of existing methods ignore," Sarhadi says. "As a result, they underestimate the risk of compound flooding." Amplified risk With their flood-forecasting method in place, the team applied it to a specific test case: New York City. They used the multipronged method to predict the city's risk of compound flooding from hurricanes, and more specifically from Sandy-like hurricanes, in present and future climates. Their simulations showed that the city's odds of experiencing Sandy-like flooding will increase significantly over the next decades as the climate warms, from once every 150 years in the current climate, to every 60 years by 2050, and every 30 years by 2099. Interestingly, they found that much of this increase in risk has less to do with how hurricanes themselves will change with warming climates, but with how sea levels will increase around the world. "In future decades, we will experience sea level rise in coastal areas, and we also incorporated that effect into our models to see how much that would increase the risk of compound flooding," Sarhadi explains. "And in fact, we see sea level rise is playing a major role in amplifying the risk of compound flooding from hurricanes in New York City." The team's methodology can be applied to any coastal city to assess the risk of compound flooding from hurricanes and extratropical storms. With this approach, Sarhadi hopes decision-makers can make informed decisions regarding the implementation of adaptive measures, such as reinforcing coastal defenses to enhance infrastructure and community resilience. "Another aspect highlighting the urgency of our research is the projected 25 percent increase in coastal populations by midcentury, leading to heightened exposure to damaging storms," Sarhadi says. "Additionally, we have trillions of dollars in assets situated in coastal flood-prone areas, necessitating proactive strategies to reduce damages from compound flooding from hurricanes under a warming climate." This research was supported, in part, by Homesite Insurance.

Researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology sought to investigate whether socioeconomically vulnerable households experienced longer power outage durations after extreme weather events. The team analyzed data from the top eight major Atlantic hurricanes between 2017 and 2020 that knocked out power for over 15 million customers in nine states across the southeastern U.S. The team found that people in lower socioeconomic tiers wait significantly longer to have power restored after a major storm -- nearly three hours longer on average. The interdisciplinary research team consists of Chuanyi Ji, an associate professor in the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering; Scott Ganz, a policy researcher at Georgetown University and a former Georgia Tech faculty member; and Chenghao Duan, a Ph.D. student in Ji's lab. Their research paper, titled "Socioeconomic Vulnerability and Differential Impact of Severe Weather-Induced Power Outages," was published in the journal PNAS Nexus . "Not only do extreme weather events impact disadvantaged communities more harshly, but power disruption can be dangerous and even life-threatening in certain contexts," Ji said. "Those with fewer resources are limited in their ability to evacuate from severe weather situations, and for individuals with electric medical equipment, an extended power outage can be disastrous." Ji, who specializes in large-scale data analytics for power grid resilience, has done previous work on power restoration procedures involving infrastructure and utility services, but wanted to expand the work into the realm of communities. The team hypothesized that disadvantaged communities likely wait longer for power to be restored, but to get a realistic picture of the mechanisms at play, the team needed to analyze troves of data. They obtained weather data for eight major hurricanes between 2017 and 2020 from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and additional flood databases. They also examined power failure data for 15 million customers for the same time period, which spanned nine states, 588 counties, and 108 utility service regions in the Southeast. The team used spatial data analytics to model weather impact across regions. They then measured customers' socioeconomic status by using the social vulnerability index, a tool produced by the Centers for Disease Control that considers indicators related to poverty, housing costs, education, health insurance, and other factors to determine socioeconomic status. Duan and Ji designed the models and estimates, and then analyzed the results to reveal the underlying relationship between customers' socioeconomic status and their power outage durations. Their results show that, when comparing affluent communities and poor communities given the same kind of impact from weather events, poor communities experienced power outages that average 170 minutes longer. Specifically, they found that a one-decile drop in socioeconomic status is associated with a 6.1% longer outage duration. Their results indicate that there is a statistically significant relationship between socioeconomic vulnerability and the duration of time that elapses before power is restored. "Our study also tries to rule out some possible explanations for why socioeconomically disadvantaged people take longer to get their power back on," Ganz said. "For example, our study controls for population density in a county and the peak number of outages in that county, and we still observe that socioeconomically disadvantaged communities experience longer outages." He theorized that the "primary cause is that poorer communities are also likely to be more distant from critical infrastructure or require more significant repairs to power lines, but these are important questions for future research." The results can have important implications for policymakers, pointing to the necessity of reexamining post-storm recovery and resource allocation policies. Service and utility providers approach power recovery by adhering to procedures and regulations that are policy-driven. Current research shows that the standard procedures for restoring power following big storms, while procedurally fair, may contribute to unequal outcomes. A greater focus on communities could help to correct the issue. "Power grid resilience is not just about the infrastructure and utility companies -- it's also about the people they serve," Ji said. "Success in achieving policy goals depends on our ability to identify the features that contribute most to these unequal impacts, which can in turn help us design appropriate interventions to improve outcomes."

The Antarctic ice sheet is the largest block of ice on earth, containing over 30 million cubic kilometers of water. Hence, its melting could have a devastating impact on future sea levels. To find out just how big that impact might be, the research team, including Dr Mark Hoggard from The Australian National University, turned to the past. "If we want to know what is going to happen in the next 100 years, we need to have an accurate model for how ice sheets respond to climate change," Dr Hoggard said. "Previous forecasts of the Antarctic contribution to global mean sea level rise were anywhere between 20 and 52cm by 2100. But by getting a better idea of sea levels during the Mid-Pliocene era, our study reduces this estimate to between 5 and 9cm. "The Mid-Pliocene period 3 million years ago is considered the best equivalent to conditions expected this coming century in terms of CO 2 levels and temperature." Dr Hoggard said accurately determining sea level during this period can help reveal how the Antarctic ice sheet behaved in the past and therefore how it might behave in the future. To determine the historic sea level, researchers first looked at the geological record of Australia to find fossilised corals and other sea-level markers that indicate how high the shoreline used to be. "This is not a perfect method as fossil markers are not only affected by the movement of the sea, but also the movement of the land," Dr Hoggard said. Over millions of years, Earth's tectonic plates move up and down in a process called dynamic topography. "If you stand on the shoreline of Australia today and see that our sea level is rising, it could be one of two things. It could be sea level genuinely rising, or it could be the land you're standing on subsiding," Dr Hoggard said. "For the first time, we have corrected for these up and down movements across a whole continent, so we can see where the sea level markers really sit." Previous estimates had sea level during the Mid-Pliocene somewhere between six and 60 meters above current sea level in Australia. Now, it can be more accurately pinned at 16 meters, with the Antarctic ice sheet likely contributing 9.8 meters in height. Dr Hoggard credited the accuracy of these predictions to significant advances in science over the past 10 years. "Thanks to better models, improvements in computational power and a greater understanding of the geological processes, our ability to map the movement of tectonic plates over the mantle has been revolutionised," he said. "Right now, this is probably the best reconstruction we've got." Reducing this uncertainty will allow for more accurate modelling of future sea level rise. While a lower estimated contribution by the Antarctic ice sheet is good news, the researchers point out there is still plenty of work to be done. "If you live in a Pacific Island nation like Tuvalu where the highest point of elevation is only 4.6 meters, small changes in the baseline sea level can have devastating impacts when disaster events like cyclones or storm surges hit," Dr Hoggard said. "Ensuring we have more accurate models can help improve policy, especially when looking at coastal and low-lying communities which can be impacted by just centimeters of sea level change."

"People tend to think that by just planting a diversity of trees, these rainforests will regenerate," said Baptiste Wijas, a postdoctoral fellow at Cary Institute and visiting academic at the University of Queensland in Australia. "But it's worth thinking about, should we actually be putting in other organisms as well, to restore other ecosystem processes that help the forest function? In the context of rainforest regeneration, no one really thinks about it at all." These questions are important, as restored forests make up an increasing proportion of total rainforest area. Reforestation -- the process of transforming agricultural or developed land back into rainforest -- is a popular strategy to preserve biodiversity and pull carbon from the atmosphere. Wijas and Cary senior scientist Amy Zanne wanted to find out how well decomposers like termites and fungi function in replanted forests, to help predict forest health and carbon sequestration rates. To check how well the decomposers were bouncing back in regenerated forests, the team placed blocks of wood in three forested areas. One site was in an old growth forest in Australia's Daintree Rainforest, at theJames Cook University Observatory. The other two nearby sites had been replanted with rainforest trees 4 and 8 years prior to the start of the study. The sites were originally lowland rainforest until around 1900, when they were converted into plantations to grow crops such as pineapple, banana, and oil palm. They were later abandoned in the 2000's, before being replanted by a nonprofit called Rainforest Rescue in 2010 and 2014. For four years, the team checked the wooden blocks at the three sites every six months to see whether they had been discovered by fungi, termites, or both, and they measured how quickly the blocks were decomposing. The field work could be grueling. "You're sweating all the time, and there are plants that want to attack you everywhere," said Wijas. In one year, the team experienced drought, flooding, fires, temperatures of 113F, and "a zombie cyclone that caught us twice," said Zanne. "It was an epic, biblical year." Based on previous studies in South American rainforests, the team expected termite activity to be similar in the replanted and old growth forests. They expected fungal decay rates would be lower in the younger forests. Instead, it turned out to be the opposite. Fungi were fairly resilient, functioning similarly in both the old growth and replanted forests, but a bit slower in the youngest forest. Termites were not so resilient. Although they were present at all three sites, they were slower to decay the wood blocks in the replanted forests than in the old growth forest, even 12 years after reforestation. The slower rate of decay may be due to the size, number, diversity, or maturity of termite colonies at the recovering sites, according to the researchers. Lower rates of termite-driven decay can mean a slower return of carbon and nutrients back to the soil, which could harm forest health and future growth. To avoid these negative impacts, the scientists suggest a novel solution: transplanting deadwood logs from old growth rainforests to newer forests. These logs could bring in decomposers from elsewhere, helping to boost abundance and diversity, while also providing a food source for decomposers that are already present. "A young, regenerating forest doesn't have a lot of deadwood in it," Zanne explained. "So if you bring in these logs, you're giving them some food to tide them over while they wait for parts of trees to start falling down." The team is also considering transplanting termite mounds straight into the forests along with the deadwood, "which is something that no one's really thought about either," said Wijas. Neither management approach has been thoroughly studied yet, and will likely be the subject of future research by the authors. Wijas and Zanne acknowledge that it may be challenging to convince forest managers to transplant termites into their forests. "Many people -- forest managers included -- don't really like termites," Wijas noted. "But they play an important role in having a healthy forest." Only about 3% of termites are known to damage human homes, Zanne pointed out, while very little is known about the other 97%. She and Wijas are working to better understand the roles that termites have in rainforests and other ecosystems. "We think termites might be locking up carbon in their nests," said Wijas. "When they eat wood, they're not able to digest all of it, and so the feces they use to build their nests could be quite carbon-rich. They may even lock up more carbon than they emit, but we just don't know yet." Termites are also associated with nitrogen-fixing bacteria, which provide a form of nitrogen that's vital to tree growth and function. "Termites and fungi are absolutely critical to forest function," said Zanne. "It would be interesting to see who else returns to the regenerating forests if the termites are there -- perhaps ants, lizards, and gliders that eat termites. Right now we just don't have any idea whether these organisms are coming back in these systems." Coauthors Coauthors on the study also included Habacuc Flores-Moreno (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation in Brisbane, Australia), Steven D. Allison (University of California, Irvine), Lucas A. Cernusak and Alexander W. Cheesman (James Cook University), Paul Eggleton (Natural History Museum, London), Robert M. Kooyman (Macquarie University and Royal Botanic Gardens and Domain Trust in Sydney, Australia), and Jeff R. Powell (Western Sydney University). Funding This research was funded by the US National Science Foundation, Ecosystem Studies Cluster, under awards DEB-1655759 and DEB-2149151 to A.E.Z. and DEB-1655340 to S.D.A., as well as UK NERC grant NE/K01613X/1 to P.E.

The findings were published in the Journal of Applied Microbiology on April 15, 2025. The team identified 455 species of microorganisms wielding 64 different biochemical pathways to degrade pollutants and 1,171 genes to process heavy metals. This suggests the potential of a cheaper, more sustainable, and less disruptive method for cleaning contaminated waterways than the current oft-used dredging operations. The researchers also discovered 2,300 novel genetic sequences that could enable microbes to produce potentially valuable biochemical compounds for medicine, industry, or environmental applications. "We found what amounts to nature's own toxic cleanup manual, but with a crucial warning," said Hénaff, who sits in NYU Tandon's Technology, Culture and Society Department and is a member of Tandon's Center for Urban Science + Progress. "These microbes have stories to tell that go beyond scientific data." To communicate these stories effectively, Hénaff and colleagues created CHANNEL, an immersive installation at BioBAT Art Space in Brooklyn, New York featuring sculpture, prints, sound, and projections alongside over 300 gallons of native Gowanus sediment and water that has been growing over the last 9 months. The Living Interfaces Lab, Hénaff's research group, uses methods from sciences and arts to address pressing urban issues. "While more research is needed to understand how to cooperate with these organisms effectively, the discovery of such genetic tools for pollution cleanup may offer valuable lessons for environmental restoration worldwide," Hénaff said. "I consider artistic research to be a key component in not just illustrating but also informing our scientific research." The work is on view at the exhibit's closing event on April 18, 2025. The team discovered genes for resistance to eight different classes of antibiotics in the canal microbes, with some coming from human gut bacteria that enter the canal during Combined Sewer Overflows -- when heavy rainfall causes stormwater and untreated sewage to discharge directly into waterways. Other resistance genes were found in native aquatic species. "The long-term coexistence of microbial communities from sewage and the natural canal environment is expected to enhance the rates of horizontal transfer of a wide array of genetic elements, and as such merits our attention for public health monitoring and surveillance as environmental 'superbug' reservoirs," said Sergios-Orestis Kolokotronis, a study co-author and assistant professor of epidemiology and infectious diseases at SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University. Despite these concerns, the study also reveals promising potential benefits. While the pollutant-degrading microbes in the canal can break down contaminants, their natural processes are too slow for practical cleanup. Understanding their genetic adaptations could help scientists develop faster methods, either by isolating specific microbes for treatment or enhancing their abilities. Some classes of contaminants such as heavy metals are also valuable materials for industry, and bioremediation methods could be adapted to resource recovery for re-use, not just removal. To make its discoveries, the team collected samples from 14 locations along the canal's 1.8-mile length, gathering both surface sediment and deep core samples reaching 11.5 feet below the canal floor. They found microbes capable of breaking down many historical pollutants, including petroleum products, PCBs, and industrial solvents. The findings come as the Environmental Protection Agency continues its $1.5 billion dredging and capping operation at the canal, removing contaminated sediment and sealing remaining pollution under clean material. The team's current study builds on prior research spanning a decade to understand the Gowanus Canal microbiome. The project began in 2014 when the current study's co-authors Ian Quate of Fruit Studio and Matthew Seibert of the University of Virginia led the first sediment sampling, processing samples at community bio lab Genspace with study co-author Ellen Jorgensen of Biotech without Borders. The DNA was sequenced in the lab of study co-author Christopher Mason -- WorldQuant Professor of Genomics and Computational Biomedicine at Weill Cornell Medicine -- as part of the Pathomap Project, now expanded to cities around the world in the metagenomics of subways and urban biomes (MetaSUB) project. "The hardy microbial organisms of the Gowanus Canal have a unique genetic catalog of survival, which provides a roadmap for adaptation and directed evolution that we can use in polluted sites around the world," said Mason, who serves as co-founder and Director of the MetaSUB Consortium. Later, lead author Hénaff's team collected more samples through the BKBioReactor project while study co-author Kolokotronisgathered core samples. Bioinformatic approaches implemented by study co-authors Chandrima Bhattacharya of Weill Cornell Medicine and Rupobrata Panja of Rutgers University allowed the team to identify microbes breaking down industrial pollutants in the canal's thick sediment. This research was supported by funding from WorldQuant Foundation, the Pershing Square Foundation, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, National Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation and NYU Tandon.

The study, led by Monash University researchers, and published in the journal, Nature Water , found that flooding events -- which are increasing globally due to climate change -- led to increases in hospitalization for cardiovascular diseases (35%), respiratory diseases (30%), infectious diseases (26%), digestive diseases (30%) such as gastroenteritis, mental health disorders (11%), diabetes (61%), cancer (34%), nervous system disorders (34%), and renal diseases (40%). Led by Professors Yuming Guo and Professor Shanshan Li, the study covered the period from 2010 to 2019, looking at 747 communities from eight countries/territories that had experienced major flood events in that period, including the northeast region of New South Wales in Australia, along the Amazon River and the southern region of Brazil, within the Mekong Basin in Vietnam, and in the south region of Thailand. An estimated 23 per cent of the global population is exposed to inundation due to serious flooding equivalent to a 1 in 100-year event. According to Professor Guo, there will be "an escalation in the severity, duration and frequency of floods due to the more frequent extreme precipitation events and rising sea levels due to global warming." While the health impacts of flooding, such as drowning, electrocution, and hypothermia, are expected, this is the first and most comprehensive study to look at broader impacts on health, "suggesting that the health impact of floods may have been underestimated and will further exacerbate as climate changes," Professor Guo said. The countries involved in the study were Australia, Vietnam, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Thailand, New Zealand and Taiwan. How Floods Have a Long-Term Impact On Health Flood events impact health through the contamination of water supply system, which can elevate the risk of digestive diseases and aid the spread of infectious diseases. Additionally, floods can create environments that are conducive to the growth of fungi, bacteria, viruses, and vectors like mice and insects which can trigger outbreaks of respiratory, digestive, and infectious diseases. Floods may also force massive evacuations, causing displacement. Even when temporary shelters are provided, short in sanitation facilities often result in hygiene issues, raising the likelihood of respiratory, digestive, and infectious diseases. Access and capacity to healthcare services may be impaired after floods, leading to delay in regular medical interventions, which include dialysis for renal diseases, chemotherapy and radiotherapy for cancer, and medication regimens for cardiovascular diseases, respiratory diseases, infectious diseases, digestive diseases, mental disorders, diabetes, nervous system disorders, and renal diseases. And long-term psychological stress (e.g., from property damage and financial losses) can worsen or induce adverse health outcomes by compromising the immune system, disrupting sleep, leading to substance abuse, and diminishing self-care.

The bacteria is a sure sign of fecal contamination, which is washed into waterways from farm fields or sewage systems by rain. The microbes are also dangerous -- exposure to E. coli can lead to illness, hospitalization and even death. Still, as many beachgoers know, it's not uncommon for E. coli to temporarily shut down lakes and other recreational waters across the U.S. Now, research led by the University of Michigan shows that communities of color in Texas face pronounced risks of E. coli exposure in nearby waters following storms that dump abnormally high amounts of rain. "E. coli is the leading cause of water quality impairments in the United States, and exposure to this pollution is not evenly distributed. We're also seeing that extreme precipitation has a disproportionate effect on E. coli pollution," said lead author Xiaofeng Liu, a postdoctoral researcher at the U-M School for Environment and Sustainability and a Schmidt AI in Science fellow at the Michigan Institute for Data and AI in Society. Liu and colleagues worked with E.coli, climate, environmental and socioeconomic data available for the state of Texas between 2001 and 2021. Using computational models, the team could spot when and where the extreme rainfall had the greatest impact on E. coli levels, while uncovering associations between these impacts and socioeconomic factors. The patterns were complex, but a couple of clear results emerged. Communities in the north and east with higher percentages of Black residents had higher concentrations of E. coli flushed into their recreational waters by extreme rain in winter. Predominantly Latino communities -- where the majority of residents were of Latin American descent -- in the southern and western parts of the state experienced outsize E. coli increases following intense storms in September. "This is a complicated issue. The communities live in these places all the time, but the rainfall impact is different in different seasons," Liu said. There are numerous social, historical, geological and meteorological variables at play for understanding this seasonality and location dependence, which are not all captured by available data, she says. Still, when coupled with the team's computational analysis, there is enough data to identify when and where contamination is most likely to occur. And with that knowledge, people can start looking for opportunities to prevent or combat the influx of E. coli. "This can inform local governments and environmental agencies and help develop targeted policies and targeted water management practices to help these impacted communities," Liu said. This work, published in the journal of Science of the Total Environment, was part of a larger project looking at water quality issues and their relationship to social factors. That project also yielded another recent report -- led by Runzi Wang, assistant professor at the University of California, Davis -- looking at E. coli levels and trends throughout Texas. That report showed that not only did Black and Latino communities tend to reside near water with higher concentrations of E. coli, so did economically disadvantaged communities. Liu and her colleagues did not observe a similar correlation between income level and extreme rainfall impacts on E. coli concentrations during their investigation. But they did find that lower-income areas were more likely to experience an increase in extreme rainfall intensity heading forward. "The regions with this increasing trend also tended to have higher percentages of lower-income residents," Liu said. "So even though there isn't a correlation now, climate variability could amplify the effect for lower-income communities in the future." The team focused their initial study on Texas because E. coli is a serious and known problem. About a third of the streams in Texas are polluted by bacteria, Liu said, but the state also has a robust monitoring system. Because of that, the team could validate their methods while also performing useful analysis. The researchers now plan to extend their work to other locations in the U.S. "With this study, we wanted to demonstrate our framework to connect surface water quality with social factors," Liu said. "Our model is definitely applicable to other regions."

A hidden world teeming with life lies below beach sands. New Stanford-led research sheds light on how microbial communities in coastal groundwater respond to infiltrating seawater. The study, published Dec. 22 in Environmental Microbiology , reveals the diversity of microbial life inhabiting these critical ecosystems and what might happen if they are inundated by rising seas. "Beaches can act as a filter between land and sea, processing groundwater and associated chemicals before they reach the ocean," said study co-first author Jessica Bullington, a Ph.D. student in Earth system science in the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability. "Understanding how these ecosystems function is key to safeguarding their services in the face of sea level rise." The research team conducted the intensive study at Stinson Beach, north of San Francisco. Stinson Beach is representative of a "high-energy" beach, which has only a handful of previous papers on the microbiome worldwide. Microbial guardians Microbial communities living in groundwater within beach sand play a crucial role in maintaining coastal water quality. These microbes help break down chemicals, including excess nutrients like nitrogen, which can come from natural sources, such as decomposing plant matter, or human sources, like agricultural runoff and wastewater. To better understand the dynamics of this microbial filtering system, the research team headed to Stinson Beach. Over two weeks, during both a wet and dry season, they collected samples from the beach's subterranean estuary around the clock to capture changing tides. Then, the researchers analyzed the microbial DNA using advanced gene sequencing techniques. This approach -- the first of its kind at such a fine time scale -- provided unprecedented insight into the microbial community's composition and stability. The researchers found that the microbial communities remained relatively stable over changing tidal conditions and seasons. However, a wave overtopping event -- when seawater surged into the aquifer due to high-energy waves -- caused significant changes in the microbial makeup. Such disturbances are expected to become more frequent with rising sea levels and storm surges, making it harder for the microbes to do their water purification work. "These microbes live in complex communities, many with specialized roles that include processing nutrients and even producing or consuming greenhouse gases," said co-senior author Christopher Francis, a professor of Earth system science and of oceans in the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability. "The microbial community's resilience under typical conditions is encouraging, but disturbances like wave overtopping highlight their vulnerability to climate change," said co-first author Katie Langenfeld, a postdoctoral scholar in civil and environmental engineering at Stanford at the time of the research and current postdoctoral fellow at the University of Michigan. Implications for coastal resilience The study's findings establish a critical baseline for understanding how subterranean estuaries function and respond to environmental changes. As sea levels rise, beach sands will be forced inland or erode, altering groundwater hydrology, chemistry, and microbial composition. The research adds a crucial piece to the puzzle of coastal resilience. By highlighting the interplay between microbial dynamics and physical processes like wave action, the study brings into question impending changes to coastal groundwater. Policymakers and coastal planners should consider the role of these hidden ecosystems when designing strategies to manage sea level rise, according to the researchers. "We rely on these microbial communities for essential biogeochemical cycling at the land-sea interface," said co-senior author Alexandria Boehm, the Richard and Rhoda Goldman Professor of Environmental Studies in the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability and the Stanford School of Engineering. "If their capacity diminishes due to climate impacts, we could see cascading effects on coastal water quality and marine life."

This isn't the only torture inflicted on the tomatoes. Someone has tied little baggies to their stems. Inside the bags, fat green caterpillars are chowing down on the tomato leaves. Entomology professor Ngumbi has questions -- lots of them -- and this is how she's set out to answer some of them. She is purposely flooding the tomatoes to see how they might respond to flooded conditions in farmers' fields -- a scenario that is becoming more common as a result of climate change. "In nature, there are many stressors on plants during flooding," Ngumbi says. "Once the tomatoes get flooded, they're already weak, so most likely they will be attracting insects, which like to eat weaker plants. We're investigating how the plants deal with the combined stress of flooding and herbivory." This explains the caterpillars. They are the larval form of Manduca sexta , the tobacco hornworm. They are feasting on one of the two heirloom tomato varieties Ngumbi is using in the experiment: Cherokee purple and striped German. Half of the tomato plants in the greenhouse are not flooded, allowing the team to compare the stressed plants with those grown in more common conditions. But there are more investigations going on here. "Also, within this experiment, we're looking at the microbes," Ngumbi says. "We want to understand how the microbial community changes in flooded conditions." One of Ngumbi's key focuses is how soil microbes influence plant health and productivity. She's fascinated by mycorrhizal fungi, which form intimate associations with plant roots, offering essential elements like nitrogen to the plants in exchange for glucose supplied by the roots. The tomato plants are all growing in soil from an Illinois farm, but half were also inoculated with mulch from a local farmer who has developed his own recipe for nurturing mycorrhizal fungi in the soil. Ngumbi wants to see if this inoculation makes any difference to the plants' ability to defend themselves from the fat caterpillars. To measure plant defenses, Ngumbi's team collects samples of gases emitted by the plants and screens them for volatile organic compounds, the chemicals plants use to ward off bugs that would eat them. *** Two years later, Ngumbi publishes the results of these and other laboratory experiments. She found that the two tomato varieties differed in gene expression and in the volatile compounds they emitted -- before any intervention. And when flooded, both varieties of tomatoes had very different chemical emission profiles than when grown in normal conditions. Herbivory influenced the production of these volatile compounds, but not as much as flooding did. Today, the experiments continue, and Ngumbi's interest in the effects of flooding has only intensified. In a new review published in the journal Trends in Plant Research , she spells out the many changes that occur when plants are inundated with water for days or weeks at a time. "Flooding is different from other climate-related stressors because it deprives plants of oxygen, an essential and indispensable element and substrate for plant growth and development," Ngumbi writes. Flooding disrupts plant metabolism and energy generation. It interferes with photosynthesis. Flooding kills beneficial bacteria and promotes pathogenic microbes in the soil. It also can compromise plants' ability to defend themselves from disease and harmful insects like the tobacco hornworm. Ngumbi also warns that increased flooding can undermine decades of research aimed at making plants more resilient to climate change. Flooding may thwart efforts to build soil quality and microbial health to make crops more resilient to stressors such as heat and drought. Flooding also may eliminate gains derived from genetic engineering or plant breeding. With flooding intensity and frequency predicted to increase by roughly 7% for every 1° C increase in global average temperatures, Ngumbi writes, scientists must consider the impacts of floods to "protect the monumental gains made in building climate-resilient crops." Ngumbi is an affiliate of the Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology at the U. of I.

Waterborne infectious diseases caused by bacteria, parasites, and viruses still affect over 7,000,000 people annually in the United States. Lynch and Shaman analyzed potential links between weather and hospitalizations for waterborne infectious diseases, specifically looking at whether these associations were influenced by drinking water source, location (rural/urban), and region. The authors looked at hospitalizations caused by 12 specific water-borne pathogens, including bacteria like Escherichia coli, parasites like Cryptosporidium, biofilm-forming bacteria such as Pseudomonas and the pathogen causing Legionnaires' disease -- distinct from other bacterial pathogens because they naturally inhabit environmental water -- and Norovirus. They used data from 516 hospitals in 25 states collected over 2000-2011 as part of the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP), along with weather and soil data from the NASA/ NOAA North American Land Data Assimilation System 2 (NLDAS-2) dataset. There were 57,335 hospitalizations for waterborne disease between 2000 and 2011 from 516 hospitals in the United States. The biofilm-forming bacteria comprised nearly 81 percent of all hospitalizations (66 percent due to respiratory Pseudomonas infections alone.) Hospitalization rates for enteric and biofilm-forming bacterial pathogens were significantly higher in areas that used groundwater as a drinking water source instead of surface water. They also found that precipitation, water runoff, and rural locations were positively associated with hospitalizations for some enteric bacterial and parasitic infections, particularly in the Midwestern region. Specifically, parasitic hospitalizations (predominantly due to Cryptosporidium) increased 9 percent (95% CI: 4%-15%) with a 1-SD increase in precipitation. Conversely, hospitalizations for biofilm-forming bacterial infections were associated with soil moisture (a proxy for flooding). Incidences of Legionnaires' disease specifically increased 124 percent (95% CI: 90%-157%) with a 1-SD increase in soil moisture, and were the only infection more common in urban areas. In general, associations between hospitalization rates and meteorological conditions, location, and drinking water source varied depending on the specific pathogens. The authors note they weren't able to include data on specific water quality (critical to assess the probable route of exposure for pathogens that can also be present in tainted food, like E. coli), or data from much of the Southeast (where states did not report monthly data to HCUP). Lynch and Shaman hope future work will be able to incorporate this information and additionally track outbreaks linked with extreme weather events to further clarify the links between hydrometeorology and waterborne diseases. The authors add: "Our results show how analyses focused on specific pathogens can provide insight into distinct routes of exposure and risk factors for waterborne infectious diseases. This work can help inform weather preparedness efforts, which is particularly important as heavy rain becomes more severe and frequent in a warming climate."

A new study led by Boston University School of Public Health (BUSPH) researchers has found that residents living in the downstream communities that border the Merrimack River are at a substantially increased risk of developing acute gastrointestinal illnesses (AGI) in the four days following large-volume combined sewer overflows (CSOs). Published in the journal Environmental Health Perspectives , the study found that risk of AGI was elevated among all of the Massachusetts cities observed in the analysis, regardless of whether communities sourced their drinking water from the Merrimack River, suggesting that residents may be exposed to sewage-associated waterborne contaminants through pathways beyond drinking water. Health experts worry that more extreme rainfall events due to climate change will spur additional large-scale CSOs, putting residents' health at risk even further. "The largest sewage releases occur when precipitation is most intense, as this produces a large volume of rainfall over a short amount of time," says study lead and corresponding author Dr. Beth Haley, postdoctoral researcher and a doctoral student at BUSPH at the time of the study. "Our findings are concerning because climate change predictions suggest that heavy rainfall events will become more frequent and intense in the Northeast, which means that residents of communities exposed to sewage-contaminated waterways may experience increased risk of severe gastrointestinal illnesses." The study lends critical insight into the health implications of CSO events, as there is very little research on the health outcomes of populations who are exposed to the waterways affected by CSOs. The analysis is also the first study to investigate the role of drinking water sources in these possible connections between CSOs and AGI. For the study, Dr. Haley and colleagues from Boston University, the University of Chicago, and New Leaf Energy utilized federal and state data to examine the volume and intensity of CSOs, along with hospital records of emergency department visits for AGI, based on diagnoses of infectious intestinal diseases, noninfectious gastroenteritis, vomiting, and diarrhea. The analysis included communities in all of the 17 northern Massachusetts cities that border the Merrimack River. After adjusting for precipitation, the results showed that residents living in CSO-impacted communities were 62 percent more likely to develop AGI within four days after the largest sewage overflow events in the study period occurred compared to days with no CSO events. But there was no meaningful difference in AGI risk based on whether residents relied on drinking water from the Merrimack River, or other sources. Exposure to sewage-associated pathogens in drinking water is particularly concerning because of the large number of people who do rely on public drinking water, the researchers say -- so the lack of evidence connecting CSO-impacted drinking water sources to AGI risk in the study was a relief. But they are careful to note that the results do not necessarily indicate that drinking water sourced from CSO-impacted waterways is harmless. "We cannot conclude that drinking water is not an exposure pathway following CSO events, but this study does suggest that other pathways -- for example, exposure during water recreation -- likely contribute more to the observed association," Dr. Haley says. More research is needed to better understand the role of drinking water on CSO-associated AGI risk, especially for populations who are more susceptible to microbial pathogens, such as immunocompromised people, older people, and young children, the team says. Although cities such as San Francisco, Seattle, and Portland, Ore. have combined sewer systems, this type of infrastructure is more prevalent in the Northeast and Midwest, where systems were built during the mid-1800s to early 1900s in the country's oldest cities. "At that time, there was little concern that combining sanitary and storm sewers would be so problematic," says study senior author Dr. Wendy Heiger-Bernays, clinical professor of environmental health at BUSPH. One of the main reasons CSO events still occur today, she says, is that combined sewer systems are expensive to separate, as are measures to minimize CSO occurrences. "Many cities that have combined sewer systems do not have the resources to make these large infrastructure investments without state or federal assistance." There is some movement to address these issues at the federal level now, Heiger-Bernays says. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is working to implement long-term control plans and water quality improvement -- and to make CSO data more readily available to the public -- in accordance with the Clean Water Act. "Massachusetts has done this at the state level following the passage of a 2021 law requiring notification of sewage overflow events, but a national system for notifications and data access does not currently exist," she says.

"Clinicians need to be ready to deal with the changes in the infectious disease landscape," said lead author George R. Thompson. Thompson is a professor at the UC Davis School of Medicine in the Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, and the Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology. "Learning about the connection between climate change and disease behavior can help guide diagnoses, treatment and prevention of infectious diseases." Thompson encouraged physicians and practitioners to maintain "a high index of suspicion of diseases on the move." "I think with improvements in our understanding of the disease, there will be more testing and we'll miss fewer cases that way," he said. Changing infectious diseases landscape Infectious diseases can be caused by viruses, bacteria, fungi or parasites. Many of these diseases are transmitted from animal to human or from human to human. One type of infectious disease is vector-borne diseases. They are caused by pathogens carried by vectors like mosquitoes, fleas and ticks. Some diseases caused by vectors aredengue, malaria and Zika. Changing rain patterns are expanding vectors' range and their active periods. Shorter, warmer winters and longer summers are also linked to more vector-borne diseases. For example, diseases caused by ticks (like babesiosis and Lyme disease) are now occurring in the winter too. They're also being found in regions farther west and north than in the past. "We're seeing cases of tick-borne diseases in January and February," said first author of the study Matthew Phillips. Phillips is an infectious diseases fellow at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School. "The tick season is starting earlier and with more active ticks in a wider range. This means that the number of tick bites is going up and with it, the tick-borne diseases." Another concern is malaria. The mosquitos that transmit the disease are expanding northward, a climate-induced change. Changing rain patterns have led to more mosquitos and a higher disease transmission rate. "As an infectious disease clinician, one of the scariest things that happened last summer was the locally acquired cases of malaria. We saw cases in Texas and Florida and then all the way north in Maryland, which was really surprising. They happened to people who didn't travel outside the U.S.," Phillips said. Zoonotic diseases, such as plague and hantavirus (carried by rodents), are also showing changes in incidence and location. The experts noted changes in animal migration patterns and natural ranges. Due to their habitat loss, wild animals are coming closer to humans. With that comes a higher risk of animal diseases spilling over to humans and for new pathogens to develop. The study also pointed to the emergence of new fungal infections, such as Candida auris (C. auris), and changes in the location of some fungal pathogens. For example, the fungal infection Coccidioides (also known as Valley fever) was endemic to hot, dry areas in California and Arizona. But Valley fever was recently diagnosed as far north as Washington State. Changes in rain patterns and coastal water temperature can also affect the spread of waterborne diseases, such as E. coli and Vibrio. According to the team, the sea level is rising, and storm surges and coastal flooding that used to be rare or extreme events are happening more frequently. Call for medical community to take steps Over the last few years, infectious diseases, such as COVID-19, impacted the world enormously. "They can spring up and cause absolute chaos for the whole world and then we kind of forget about them for a while. Yet, the epidemic and pandemic potential of infections really mandates that we stay involved with federal funding agencies and advisory groups to make sure that infectious diseases don't slip back too far on the public's radar," Thomspon explained. The team called for stronger measures for infectious disease surveillance and urged medical educators to train clinicians to anticipate the changes in infectious disease patterns. "It's not a hopeless situation. There are distinct steps that we can take to prepare for and help deal with these changes. Clinicians see first-hand the impact of climate change on people's health. As such, they have a role in advocating for policies that can slow climate change," Phillips said. Regina C. LaRocque, associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and infectious diseases physician at Harvard Medical School, is a coauthor of this study. This study was partially supported by National Institutes of Health grants T32AI007061 and 5U19AI166798.

One of these species is the tundra vole, one of four Arctic or boreal forest animals that Philip Manlick, a research wildlife biologist with the USDA Forest Service Pacific Northwest Research Station in Juneau, Alaska, examined as part of his new study published today in the journal Nature Climate Change . Along with collaborators from the University of New Mexico and the University of Texas at Austin, Manlick used a novel technique to quantify the impacts of climate change on energy flow and carbon fluxes between plant-supported aboveground, or green, food webs and microbe-driven belowground, or brown, food webs using two species of vole, a shrew, and a spider as windows into the complex worlds. "Understanding how energy moves through food webs helps us understand how ecosystems function and how animals might respond to stressors like climate change," Manlick said. "In Arctic and boreal ecosystems, it's well known that the climate is warming, permafrost is melting, and microbes are flourishing. But we know very little about the impacts of this process on terrestrial food webs and the animals they support." A Novel Technique With Promise The novel technique at the heart of the study involved measuring unique carbon isotope "fingerprints" in essential amino acids that only plants, bacteria, and fungi can produce. Animals can only acquire these molecules through their diets. This allowed these essential amino acids to serve as a biomarker that helped the researchers track how carbon was moving between green and brown food webs, which, ultimately, helped them detect changes. "Scientists often argue about the importance of animals to ecosystem processes like carbon cycling, but when they eat resources from different food webs, they move carbon between storage pools," Manlick said. "In the future, we think this tool can be used to trace the fate of carbon through food webs to understand the functional roles of animals in ecosystem functions, like nutrient cycling." The study analyzed bone collagen from museum specimens of tundra and red-backed voles and masked shrews from the Bonanza Creek Experimental Forest near Fairbanks, Alaska, in 1990 and 2021, a sample that represented animals exposed to long-term climate warming. To study the effects of short-term climate warming on animals, the researchers sampled Arctic wolf spiders near Toolik Lake, Alaska. Some of the spiders were gathered as controls and others were exposed to 2 °C warming in outdoor compartmentalized habitats called "mesocosms" in which the scientists could increase temperature on a micro scale to simulate climate warming. At just over 12,000 acres, and encompassing interior forest and flood-plain habitats, Bonanza Creek Experimental Forest is an ideal site for studying the impacts of climate change on boreal forests and food webs because it provides a long-term record of change in interior Alaska. It was established by the USDA Forest Service 60 years ago and has been a National Science Foundation Long-term Ecological Research site since 1987. For Manlick, the site offers an opportunity to study how these boreal forest changes are affecting the animals living there and how the animals, themselves, affect forest processes through foraging and food web dynamics. Significant Shift in Energy Source Through their isotope analyses, Manlick and his colleagues detected significant changes in carbon assimilation in the mammals -- notably a shift from plant-based food webs to fungal-based food webs. In other words, fungi replaced plants as the main energy source -- with small mammals, like the shrews, assimilating up to 90 percent of their total carbon intake from fungal carbon, a more than 40-percent increase over historical specimens. The same was true for the Arctic wolf spiders. They, too, shifted from plant-based to fungal-based food webs as the main source of their energy, assimilating more than 50 percent brown carbon under warming conditions, compared to 26 percent at control sites. "Our study presents clear evidence that climate warming alters carbon flow and food web dynamics among aboveground consumers in Arctic tundra and boreal forest ecosystems -- across species, ecosystems, and long- and short-term warming scenarios," Manlick said. "And we show that these changes are the consequence of a change from predominantly green, plant-based food webs to brown, microbe-based food webs." What's behind the shift? The scientists suspect brown carbon is being transferred to aboveground consumers, like the mammals and spiders, in a series of predation events known as trophic pathways. Increased warming results in increased decomposition in both permafrost on the tundra and in boreal forests; fungi feed on this decomposing plant matter and are, in turn, consumed by arthropods, mites, and earthworms that transfer the fungal carbon upward in the food web where they, in turn, are consumed by the voles, shrews, and spiders. "Climate warming significantly alters the flow of energy through food webs, such that animals who were historically supported by plant-based food webs are now supported by fungal-based food webs derived from belowground decomposition," Manlick said. Animals Can Alter Carbon Cycling Manlick and his colleagues' work underscores that animals serve as a crucial link between green and brown food webs; it also shows that climate warming alters this link across species in the Arctic and in boreal forests. The potential implications of these climate-induced shifts are greater than the small size of these species might imply. "Shifts in these interactions can have indirect effects on nutrient cycling and ecosystem function," Manlick said. For example, if voles are getting more of their energy from belowground sources, they may be consuming fewer plants, which could increase carbon storage in aboveground ecosystems. "Much of the current work in high latitudes has focused on 'Arctic greening,' or the idea that climate warming is leading to more plant growth and greener ecosystems. We found the exact opposite pattern -- food webs are 'browning,'" he said. Moving forward, Manlick plans to study why these patterns in plants and animals differ and what it means for the future of these rapidly changing ecosystems.

This is the first 'horizon scanning' exercise -- a technique to identify relatively unknown threats, opportunities, and new trends -- of UK forests. The aim is to help researchers, practitioners, policymakers, and society in general, better prepare for the future and address threats before they become critical. Dr Eleanor Tew, first author, visiting researcher at Cambridge's Department of Zoology and Head of Forest Planning at Forestry England said: "The next 50 years will bring huge changes to UK forests: the threats they face, the way that we manage them, and the benefits they deliver to society." Forestry England, a part of the Forestry Commission, collaborated with the University of Cambridge on the study, which was published today in the journal, Forestry . A panel comprising 42 experts, who represented a range of professions, organisations, and geographies, reached out to their networks to seek over-looked and emerging issues that were likely to affect UK forests over the next half a century. The resulting 180-item longlist was then whittled down through a series of review exercises to a shortlist of 30 issues. In a final workshop, panellists identified the top 15 issues they believed were likely to have the greatest impact on UK forests in the next 50 years. The research method did not support the overall ranking of the 15 issues in order of importance or likelihood of occurrence. However, when the issues were scored individually by the panel of experts, it was notable that 'catastrophic forest ecosystem collapse' was the most highly ranked issue, with 64% of experts ranking it as their top issue and 88% ranking it within their top three. 'Catastrophic forest ecosystem collapse' refers to multiple interrelated hazards that have a cascading effect on forests, leading to their total or partial collapse. This has already been witnessed in continental Europe and North America. Tew said: "We hope the results from this horizon scanning exercise serve as an urgent call to action to build on, and dramatically upscale, action to increase forest resilience." Another issue identified was that droughts caused by climate change may lead to competition for water resources between forests and society. On the other hand, forests may help to mitigate the impact of floods caused by climate change. Tree viral diseases were also identified as an issue. In the UK, pests and pathogens are increasing due to globalisation and climate change, with viruses and viroids (RNA molecules) being the largest group on the UK Plant Health Risk Register. However, little is known about how viral diseases affect forest tree species and indeed the wider ecosystem. A further issue was the effect of climate change on forest management, with extreme weather leading to smaller windows of time when forestry can be carried out. Experts warn that the seasons for carrying out work such as harvesting and thinning are getting narrower as we see wetter winters and scorching summers. However not all emerging issues are threats -- some are new opportunities. For example, trees will be at the heart of future urban planning. Experts predict that 'forest lungs' will be created thanks to an increased understanding of the benefits of trees for society. They say there will likely be a greater blurring of boundaries between urban and rural areas, with an increase in green infrastructure and connectivity. International commitments around nature are also likely to have repercussions at the local level. For example, the mandatory reporting of companies' supply chain impacts on nature, such as through the new framework being developed by the Taskforce on Nature-related Financial Disclosures (TNFD), could create additional incentives for nature-friendly forest management. Tew concluded: "These results are both concerning and exciting. However, we should be optimistic, remembering that these are possibilities and not certainties. Crucially, we have time to act ? by responding to the threats and embracing the opportunities, future generations can have resilient forests with all the benefits they offer." Senior author and pioneer of horizon scanning, Professor Bill Sutherland, from the Department of Zoology at the University of Cambridge said: "We are already seeing dramatic events in Europe's forests whether fires, disease or bark beetles, whilst the importance of trees is increasingly recognised. Horizon scanning to identify future issues is key, especially as trees planted now will face very different circumstances as they mature in scores of years." This research was funded by Forestry England. The Forestry Commission are bringing the sector together in 2024 to look at next steps. The full list of issues identified by the report includes:

Researchers from The Ohio State University analyzed population data -- including life expectancy -- in more than 66,000 census tracts throughout the U.S. and compared it based on proximity to waterways. Their study was published online in the journal Environmental Research . A correlation between longer life expectancy and water was clear for those who live within about 30 miles of an ocean or gulf. But for those who live in urban settings and near an inland body of water larger than 4 square miles, the opposite was true. Rural residents who live near water may also reap some lifespan advantages, according to the research. "Overall, the coastal residents were expected to live a year or more longer than the 79-year average, and those who lived in more urban areas near inland rivers and lakes were likely to die by about 78 or so. The coastal residents probably live longer due to a variety of intertwined factors," said lead researcher Jianyong "Jamie" Wu. The analysis suggested that milder temperatures, better air quality, more opportunities for recreation, better transportation, less susceptibility to drought, and higher incomes could all be contributors to a better outlook for coastal residents compared to those who live inland. "On the other side, pollution, poverty, lack of safe opportunities to be physically active and an increased risk of flooding are likely drivers of these differences," said Yanni Cao, a postdoctoral researcher who worked on the study. The most critical difference the researchers found is that coastal areas experience fewer hot days and lower maximum temperatures compared to inland water areas. Previous research has found a connection between living near water and better health measures, including higher physical activity levels, lower obesity rates and improved heart health. That prompted Wu to wonder if there could be a link between "blue space" living and longer lives, and how that relationship might differ depending on the type of neighborhood people call home, he said. "We thought it was possible that any type of 'blue space' would offer some beneficial effects, and we were surprised to find such a significant and clear difference between those who live near coastal waters and those who live near inland waters," said Wu, an assistant professor of environmental health sciences at The Ohio State University College of Public Health. "We found a clear difference -- in coastal areas, people are living longer," said Wu, adding that the study is the first to comprehensively and systematically examine the relationship between various types of "blue space" and longevity in the U.S. Cao said she was especially curious about how this data might provide insights into the trends in life expectancy in the U.S. compared to other wealthy nations. In the past several years, the U.S. experienced a sharper decline and a slower rebound in life expectancy than peer countries. "It's likely that various social determinants of health, including complex environmental factors, that contribute to health inequities are playing a key role in the differences we saw," she said. Ria Martins, a graduate student in public health, was also a co-author.

Hygroscopic growth causes fine particulate matter (PM1) to swell, reducing sampling devices efficiency and leading to underestimation, with greatest underestimation in estimated concentrations happening during winter morning rush hours, when humidity is highest and pollution is most severe. In contrast, research shows that the monsoon season shows negligible bias due to the washout of hygroscopic particles by heavy rainfall -- the bias is more pronounced during high pollution episodes, with underestimation increasing exponentially with humidity. Publishing the findings today (12 Mar) in NPJ Clean Air, study author Dr Ying Chen, from the University of Birmingham, concludes that PM1 pollution in the city is worse than previously thought, but provides correction tools for future studies to better estimate particulate levels. Dr Chen commented: "This study highlights the true extent of air pollution in New Delhi and offers a framework for more accurate future assessments that better inform public health strategies and mitigation efforts. When carrying out air quality assessments, it is crucial to consider hygroscopic growth and the potential for significant underestimation of pollution levels in humid conditions." Biased measurements due to hygroscopic growth are significant in New Delhi due to the high-water content of its aerosol particles, which can contain up to 740 µg/m³ of water and is the highest in megacities all over the world. The study suggests that controlling emissions from biomass burning and residential sources, which emits highly hygroscopic chlorine species, could effectively improve air quality and reduce this bias, therefore improve air quality understanding as well. Dr Chen calls for more in-situ observations of PM2.5 and PM10 to gain a more rounded understanding of air pollution in New Delhi. There are several seasonal variations identified in the study: Winter (December to January): The most significant underestimation (up to 20%) occurs during the morning rush hour (8-9 am) due to high humidity (90%) and a shallow planetary boundary layer -- the lowest part of the atmosphere, where the surface of the Earth affects the wind, temperature, and moisture. Spring (February to March): The second highest variance occurs during the morning rush hour with an average relative humidity (RH) of 80%, leading to an 8.6% underestimation. Monsoon (July to September): Despite high humidity (85%), bias is minimal due to the washout of hygroscopic particles by frequent rain. Summer (April to June): The driest season with RH between 28% and 50%, resulting in negligible bias due to limited hygroscopic growth. New Delhi is recognized as the world's most polluted capital city, with severe air quality issues threatening the health of its 33 million residents. Particulate matter is the dominant pollutant, responsible for approximately 10,000 premature deaths annually. The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that New Delhi's PM1 levels are 24 times higher than recommended safe levels, even though based on the underestimated observations.

Smoke from forest fires impacts millions of people every year. It can travel thousands of miles from its origin, creating a layer of haze and worsening respiratory conditions such as asthma. Now, researchers have developed a new algorithm using satellite imagery and particulate matter (PM2.5) levels to quickly see which parts of the country experienced the most smoke over the last five years. Cities in Oregon, Nevada, Washington and other Western states had the highest smoke levels on average. But 2023 saw metropolitan areas as far east as Baltimore flooded with unhealthy smoke levels, and cities in Wisconsin and Minnesota bore the brunt of the incoming smoke from Canadian forest fires. Knowing where smoke strikes can help cities prepare for health issues and understand just how much of their PM2.5 air pollution comes down to wildfires, said Dan Jaffe, an atmospheric chemist at the University of Washington who led the research. Jaffe will present his research on 10 December at AGU's 2024 Annual Meeting in Washington, D.C. Smoke City, USA Wildfires are growing in size and frequency because of climate change, and as people move from urban areas to woodlands and other more fire-prone areas, the population exposed to smoke is growing. Current methods for measuring impacts of wildfire often focus on "smoke days," where smoke is above 'normal' levels. Those methods are labor intensive, and data analysis can take up to a year to complete. To get a faster turnaround time, Jaffe and colleagues created an algorithm that could quickly sorted through two sets of data collected between 2019 and 2023: satellite images of smoke and PM2.5 concentrations collected at ground level throughout the United States. The researchers trained an algorithm to recognize smoke days from these two data sets. They then added health data from hospitals in those cities to see whether smoke had an impact on emergency room visits during especially hazy days. The algorithm revealed that three cities in western Oregon -- Medford, Grants Pass and Bend -- were the smokiest cities on average over five years. In Medford, the smokiest city, daily levels of PM2.5 averaged 4.2 µg/m3 over one year. Smoke doesn't impact towns every day. But averaged out over a whole year, the smokiest cities in each Western state saw daily averages of 3.4 µg/m3 in Gardenville-Rancho in Nevada; 2.7 µg/m3 in Bishop, California; Yakima, at 2.5 µg/m3 in Washington; and 2.3 µg/m3 in Fairbanks-College, Alaska. The smokiest city with more than a million people is the Sacramento metropolitan area, with an annual daily PM2.5 averaging 2.0 µg/m3. The EPA recommends that annual exposure to PM2.5 should not exceed 9.0 ug/m3. That means that in the smokiest parts of the country, average daily exposures are "a very significant fraction' of the EPA's annual cut off, Jaffe said. A strange wildfire season States outside the West also saw a rise in emergency room visits due to smoke. The researchers estimate that around one-third of all PM2.5-related emergency room visits in Detroit during 2023 were due to smoke. Those visits were likely caused by smoke from Canadian fires pouring in over the border. "2023 was this strange year where the Canadian forests were just torched like crazy, and the Midwest got hit extremely hard," Jaffe said. Within the study period, 2023 saw the highest increase in emergency room visits related to wildfire smoke. The entire country saw an extra 16,000 emergency room visits during "smoke days" in 2023 compared to previous years. In Bend, Oregon, a city that outside of the fire season has relatively clean air, around 60% of asthma-related visits in 2023 were related to smoke. Because of the Canadian fires, North Dakota, Minnesota and Wisconsin joined the list of smokiest spots. Even Baltimore's daily PM2.5 average reached 2.0 µg/m3 in 2023, compared to an average of 0.7 µg/m3 during the other four years. A repeat of 2023 isn't likely to occur immediately, Jaffe said. But wildfire patterns are changing in North America. That comes with health implications for millions of Americans, with a growing body of research suggesting that smoke exposure can have long-term impacts on human health. "For cities and towns, I think it's important to be planning ahead and thinking about what's a normal year, and what's an extreme year," Jaffe said.

The study analysed samples collected alongside some of the busiest routes in South West England and the Midlands, many used by more than 100,000 vehicles each day. Tyre particles were discovered in each of the 70 samples taken, confirming the findings of previous research which has shown them to pose a considerable environmental threat. However, the presence of wetlands and retention ponds led to an average reduction of almost 75% in the mass of tyre wear particles being discharged to aquatic waters, thus providing protection for rivers and the ocean beyond. The study also found that tyre wear particles significantly outweighed other forms of microplastics, such as plastic fibres and fragments, in the samples collected but that they were also removed in far greater quantities. The researchers say that while the number of retention ponds and wetlands is quite small, in terms of the UK's entire road network, the study has international significance as to the most effective ways to mitigate against the potential impacts of tyre pollution on a global scale. They have also recommended that the maintenance of retention ponds and wetlands should be considered a major priority so that their apparent benefits, when it comes to reducing the flow of tyre particles from roads to rivers, continue to be realised. The research is published in the Environmental Science and Pollution Research journal, and was carried out by scientists from the University of Plymouth and Newcastle University. It was funded by UK National Highways. Florence Parker-Jurd, Associate Research Fellow in the University of Plymouth's International Marine Litter Research Unit, is the study's lead author. She said: "Retention ponds and wetlands are constructed as part of highways projects primarily to attenuate flow and prevent downstream flooding, but also to remove pollutants. This study set out to establish if these existing drainage measures in place along parts of the UK's strategic road network have the potential to halt the spread of tyre pollution. Our results are positive in that regard, and provide a much improved understanding on the extent and nature of tyre pollution. Similar drainage assets are used on a global scale; hence these results are of broad relevance to the management of tyre wear particle pollution." Dr Geoff Abbott, Reader in Organic Geochemistry in the School of Natural and Environmental Sciences (SNES) at Newcastle University, has previously developed a breakthrough method using pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (Py-GC-MS) to detect tyre-derived particles in the environment. He explained: "Py-GC-MS is a really productive approach that can unravel and quantify the monomeric components of microplastics in the environment. We used it to identify specific components of micro- and nanoplastics that can be unequivocally linked to vehicle tyre tread. That has enabled us to get hard numbers on the total amount of tyre wear particles that are collecting in the influent, effluent, and sediments of the retention ponds and wetlands in this study." The new research builds on previous studies involving researchers from Plymouth and Newcastle showing that tyre particles can be transported directly to the ocean through the atmosphere or carried by rainwater into rivers and sewers. Professor Richard Thompson OBE FRS, Head of the International Marine Litter Research Unit, is senior author on the current study. He added: "Tyre particles are thought to be among the greatest sources of microplastic pollution worldwide. This finding suggests that existing features of the road network can halt their flow into rivers and seas. But the number of these features is small compared to the total road network and our earlier work has shown substantial quantities of tyre wear particles are dispersed by wind rater then water. Ultimately, we need to seek more systemic solutions perhaps via improved vehicle tyre design." Professor Thompson is also currently leading the ongoing TYRE-LOSS project, which aims to highlight the effects of tyre pollution in the marine environment. A study published by scientists involved in that project earlier this year also found that particles released into the environment from common road tyres should be treated as a "high concern" pollutant.

Microplastic particles are a major environmental pollutant today. Road traffic accounts for a particularly large proportion: in Germany alone, tyre wear is said to generate around one hundred thousand tonnes of microplastics every year, in addition to particles from astroturf, cosmetics, washing powders, clothing, disposable masks, plastic bags and other waste that end up in nature. Microplastic particles can now be found everywhere. But what happens to these particles in different soils? Do they break up into smaller and smaller pieces and how are they relocated and transported, changing the structures in the soil? Some of these questions are already being analysed: A soil sample is floated in a heavy salt solution, whereupon the individual components separate according to density: Plastic and organic particles float to the top, while mineral particles sink. The mixture of organic material and plastic particles is then treated with hydrogen peroxide, for example, whereby the organic components decompose and the microplastic particles should remain. Although this method makes it possible to determine the quantity and type of microplastic in a soil sample, information is lost as to where exactly these particles accumulate in the soil and whether they change any structures in the soil. 3D tomography with neutrons and X-rays In their new study, Prof Sascha Oswald (University of Potsdam) and Dr Christian Tötzke (University of Potsdam and HZB) have now presented a method to answer these questions. They worked closely with the team led by Dr Nikolay Kardjilov, HZB, whose expertise went into setting up a unique instrument at the Institut Laue-Langevin, Grenoble: there, samples can be analysed with neutrons and X-rays to create 3D tomographies simultaneously, i.e. without altering the sample. While neutrons visualise organic and synthetic particles, X-ray tomography shows the mineral particles and the structure they form. Method tested on prepared soil samples To test the method, Tötzke prepared a series of soil samples from sand, organic components such as peat or charcoal and artificial microplastic particles. In a further series of measurements, he investigated how the roots of fast-growing lupins penetrate the soil samples and how they react to the presence of microplastics. In the neutron tomograms, the microplastic particles are clearly identified, as can some of the organic components. X-ray tomography, on the other hand, provides an insight into the arrangement of the sand grains, whereas the organic and plastic particles are shown as diffuse voids. When superimposed, a complete image of the soil sample is obtained. This allows the scientists to estimate the size and shape of the microplastic particles, as well as the changes to the soil structure caused by the embedded microplastics. "This method is quite complex, but it makes it possible for the first time to investigate where microplastic particles are deposited and how they change the soil and its structure," explains Tötzke. He also analysed sandy soil from a field near Beelitz, a typical asparagus-growing area in Brandenburg near Berlin, into which he mixed pieces of so called mulch film, a very thin plastic film used to protect the plants. In "real life" farming it is usually not possible to remove this film after use completely. Remaining film residues are then carried into deeper soil layers during ploughing "We were able to show that fragments of such films can change the water flow in the soil. Microplastic fibres, on the other hand, created small cracks in the soil matrix," says Tötzke. It is not yet possible to predict how this will affect the soil's hydraulic properties, for example its ability to store water. "As droughts and heavy rainfall become more likely with climate change, it is urgent to answer these questions. We now need to investigate this systematically," says Tötzke.

The Sun is the most energetic particle accelerator in the Solar System. It whips up electrons to nearly the speed of light and flings them out into space, flooding the Solar System with so-called 'Solar Energetic Electrons' (SEEs). Researchers have now used Solar Orbiter to pinpoint the source of these energetic electrons and trace what we see out in space back to what's actually happening on the Sun. In a paper to be published in Astronomy & Astrophysics on September 1, they explain that they found two kinds of SEE with clearly distinct stories: one connected to intense solar flares (explosions from smaller patches of the Sun's surface), and one to larger eruptions of hot gas from the Sun's atmosphere (known as 'coronal mass ejections', or CMEs). "We see a clear split between 'impulsive' particle events, where these energetic electrons speed off the Sun's surface in bursts via solar flares, and 'gradual' ones associated with more extended CMEs, which release a broader swell of particles over longer periods of time," says lead author Alexander Warmuth of the Leibniz Institute for Astrophysics Potsdam (AIP), Germany. A clearer connection While scientists were aware that two types of SEE event existed, Solar Orbiter was able to measure a large number of events, and look far closer to the Sun than other missions had, to reveal how they form and leave the surface of our star. "We were only able to identify and understand these two groups by observing hundreds of events at different distances from the Sun with multiple instruments - something that only Solar Orbiter can do," adds Alexander. "By going so close to our star, we could measure the particles in a 'pristine' early state and thus accurately determine the time and place they started at the Sun." Flight delays The researchers detected the SEE events at different distances from the Sun. This let them study how the electrons behave as they travel through the Solar System, answering a lingering question about these energetic particles. When we spot a flare or a CME, there's often an apparent lag between what we see taking place at the Sun, and the release of energetic electrons into space. In extreme cases, the particles seem to take hours to escape. Why? "It turns out that this is at least partly related to how the electrons travel through space - it could be a lag in release, but also a lag in detection," says co-author and ESA Research Fellow Laura Rodríguez-García. "The electrons encounter turbulence, get scattered in different directions, and so on, so we don't spot them immediately. These effects build up as you move further from the Sun." The space between the Sun and the planets of the Solar System isn't empty. A wind of charged particles streams out from the Sun constantly, dragging the Sun's magnetic field with it. It fills space and influences how the energetic electrons travel; rather than being able to go where they like, they are confined, scattered, and disturbed by this wind and its magnetism. The study fulfils an important goal of Solar Orbiter: to continuously monitor our star and its surroundings to trace ejected particles back to their sources at the Sun. "Thanks to Solar Orbiter, we're getting to know our star better than ever," says Daniel Müller, ESA Project Scientist for Solar Orbiter. "During its first five years in space, Solar Orbiter has observed a wealth of Solar Energetic Electron events. As a result, we've been able to perform detailed analyses and assemble a unique database for the worldwide community to explore." Keeping Earth safe Crucially, the finding is important for our understanding of space weather, where accurate forecasting is essential to keep our spacecraft operational and safe. One of the two kinds of SEE events is more important for space weather: that connected to CMEs, which tend to hold more high-energy particles and so threaten far more damage. Because of this, being able to distinguish between the two types of energetic electrons is hugely relevant for our forecasting. "Knowledge such as this from Solar Orbiter will help protect other spacecraft in the future, by letting us better understand the energetic particles from the Sun that threaten our astronauts and satellites," adds Daniel. "The research is a really great example of the power of collaboration - it was only possible due to the combined expertise and teamwork of European scientists, instrument teams from across ESA Member States, and colleagues from the US." Looking ahead, ESA's Vigil mission will pioneer a revolutionary approach, operationally observing the 'side' of the Sun for the first time, unlocking continuous insights into solar activity. To be launched in 2031, Vigil will detect potentially hazardous solar events before they come into view as seen from Earth, giving us advance knowledge of their speed, direction and chance of impact. Our understanding of how our planet responds to solar storms will also be investigated further with the launch of ESA's Smile mission next year. Smile will study how Earth endures the relentless 'wind', and sporadic bursts, of fierce particles thrown our way from the Sun, exploring how the particles interact with our planet's protective magnetic field. Solar Orbiter is a space mission of international collaboration between ESA and NASA, operated by ESA.

In June 2018, the city of Lausanne in Switzerland experienced an extreme and short-lived rainfall episode, with 41 millimeters of precipitation falling in just 10 minutes. Large parts of the city were flooded, resulting in estimated damage of 32 million Swiss Francs. These short, extreme events, often causing severe damage to property and posing risks to lives, are still very rare in Switzerland today. However, with the rise in temperatures caused by global warming, they are likely to become more frequent in the future, particularly over the Alpine mountains and their surroundings. Warm air retains more moisture (around 7% more per degree) and intensifies thunderstorm activity. As the Alpine region is warming faster than the global average, it is particularly hard hit. It is therefore urgent to assess the impact of global warming in these regions. In a new study published in npj Climate and Atmospheric Science (a Nature portfolio journal), scientists from UNIL's Faculty of Geosciences and Environment, in collaboration with the University of Padua (UNIPD) have demonstrated that an average temperature rise of 2°C could double the frequency of short-lived summer rainstorms in the Alpine region. With such warming, an intense storm currently expected every 50 years could occur every 25 years in the future. To obtain these results, the researchers examined data from almost 300 weather stations in the European Alps, spread across Switzerland, Germany, Austria, France, and Italy. They focused on record-breaking rainfall events (lasting from 10 minutes to an hour) between 1991 and 2020, as well as temperatures associated with these storms. Based on these observations, a statistical model incorporating physics principles has been developed to establish a link between temperature and rainfall frequency, and then to simulate the future frequency of extreme precipitation using regional climate projections. "Our results show that an average temperature rise of 1°C would already be highly problematic," warns Nadav Peleg, researcher at UNIL and first author of the study. "The sudden and massive arrival of large volumes of water prevents the soil from absorbing the excess. This can trigger flash floods and debris flows, leading to infrastructure damage and, in some cases, casualties," he adds. "It is therefore crucial to understand how these events may evolve with climate change in order to plan appropriate adaptation strategies, such as improving urban drainage infrastructure where necessary." Francesco Marra, researcher at UNIPD and one of the main authors of the study adds: "An increase of 1°C is not hypothetical, it is likely to occur in the coming decades. We are already witnessing a tendency for summer storms to intensify, and this trend is only expected to worsen in the years ahead."

The research, published June 4 in the Journal of Hydrometeorology , analyzed more than 43,000 atmospheric river storms across 122 watersheds on the West Coast between 1980 and 2023. The researchers found that one of the primary driving forces of flooding is wet soils that can't absorb more water when a storm hits. They showed that flood peaks were 2-4.5 times higher, on average, when soils were already wet. These findings can help explain why some atmospheric river storms cause catastrophic flooding while others of comparable intensity do not. Even weaker storms can generate major floods if their precipitation meets a saturated Earth, while stronger storms may bring needed moisture to a parched landscape without causing flooding. "The main finding comes down to the fact that flooding from any event, but specifically from atmospheric river storms, is a function not only of the storm size and magnitude, but also what's happening on the land surface," said Mariana Webb, lead author of the study who is completing her Ph.D. at DRI and the University of Nevada, Reno. "This work demonstrates the key role that pre-event soil moisture can have in moderating flood events. Interestingly, flood magnitudes don't increase linearly as soil moisture increases, there's this critical threshold of soil moisture wetness above which you start to see much larger flows." The study also untangled the environmental conditions of regions where soil moisture has the largest influence on flooding. In arid places like California and southwestern Oregon, storms that hit when soils are already saturated are more likely to cause floods. This is because watersheds in these regions typically have shallow, clay-rich soils and limited water storage capacity. Due to lower precipitation and higher evaporation rates, soil moisture is also more variable in these areas. In contrast, in lush Washington and the interior Cascades and Sierra Nevada regions, watersheds tend to have deeper soils and snowpack, leading to a higher water storage capacity. Although soil saturation can still play a role in driving flooding in these areas, accounting for soil moisture is less valuable for flood management because soils are consistently wet or insulated by snow. "We wanted to identify the watersheds where having additional information about the soil moisture could enhance our understanding of flood risk," Webb said. "It's the watersheds in more arid climates, where soil moisture is more variable due to evaporation and less consistent precipitation, where we can really see improvements in flood prediction." Although soil moisture data is currently measured at weather monitoring stations like the USDA's SNOTEL Network, observations are relatively sparse compared to other measures like rainfall. Soil moisture can also vary widely within a single watershed, so often multiple stations are required to give experts a clear picture that can help inform flooding predictions. Increased monitoring in watersheds identified as high-risk, including real-time soil moisture observations, could significantly enhance early warning systems and flood management as atmospheric rivers become more frequent and intense. By tailoring flood risk evaluations to a specific watershed's physical characteristics and climate, the study could improve flood-risk predictions. The research demonstrates how flood risk increases not just with storm size and magnitude, but with soil moisture, highlighting the value of integrating land surface conditions into impact assessments for atmospheric rivers. "My research really focuses on this interdisciplinary space between atmospheric science and hydrology," Webb said. "There's sometimes a disconnect where atmospheric scientists think about water up until it falls as rain, and hydrologists start their work once the water is on the ground. I wanted to explore how we can better connect these two fields." Webb worked with DRI ecohydrologist Christine Albano to produce the research, building on Albano's extensive expertise studying atmospheric rivers, their risks, and their impacts on the landscape. "While soil saturation is widely recognized as a key factor in determining flood risk, Mari's work helps to quantify the point at which this level of saturation leads to large increases in flood risk across different areas along the West Coast," Albano said. "Advances in weather forecasting allow us to see atmospheric rivers coming toward the coast several days before they arrive. By combining atmospheric river forecast information with knowledge of how close the soil moisture is to critical saturation levels for a given watershed, we can further improve flood early warning systems."

Fueled by unusually heavy rains, falling on ground still saturated by two other recent large storms, Ida would eventually carve a path of destruction through the region. Some New Jersey cities and towns received as many as nine inches of rain within a 24-hour period, overwhelming drainage capabilities; the metro region's subways, train stations and tracks flooded for days, paralyzing mass transit. All told, Ida would wreak an estimated $75 billion in total damages and be responsible for 112 fatalities -- including 32 in New Jersey and 16 in New York state. Yet the hurricane could have been even worse in the Big Apple. That's the conclusion of Stevens professor and Davidson Lab researcher Philip Orton, working with doctoral candidate Shima Kasaei and two U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) researchers, who recently published new simulations of that hurricane in a major journal. These types of simulations and models are extremely valuable to agencies and community officials for advance emergency planning and extreme-event response. "Parts of the city, including the area around JFK airport that we studied, were spared the very worst," notes Orton, an extreme-weather and sea-level modeling expert. "If the storm's track were shifted just 30 miles eastward it would have still soaked the urban centers of New Jersey but produced far more rainfall, higher waters, stronger floods and -- one can assume -- additional casualties and property damage in New York City." A fuller picture, a best case -- and a worst case To investigate the unusual nature of Ida and the ways it could have played out differently, the team first tweaked -- then put to work -- a respected modeling system used for forecasting regional coastal storm impacts. USGS researchers at the Woods Hole Coastal and Marine Science Center in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, developed and first unveiled the system, known as COAWST (for Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere-Waves-Sediment Transport) in 2010. "As the name indicates, COAWST integrates four of the most important storm factors and forces into a single model," says Orton. "No other model combines data and simulations for ocean tides, rainfall, wave heights and surge, as well as sand and sediment movement." But even this complex model didn't capture all important factors. In particular, coastal hazard models rarely incorporated the effect of "pluvial flooding": the kind that occurs when heavy rain falls directly onto a land surface, then runs off. In urban areas, rainfall and runoff can quickly accumulate and deepen atop streets and in low-lying areas. "The combined effect of simultaneous high tides, storm surges, rising rivers, heavy rain and surface overflow is known as 'compound flooding.' It's particularly dangerous -- but also difficult to forecast, because of all the variables involved," explains Orton. To simulate the pluvial effect, the research group improved parts of COAWST, integrating the rainfall water volume directly into the model's primary equations and resulting floodwater depths. The researchers then zeroed in on the Jamaica Bay area of Long Island, in New York -- a highly populated area, susceptible to both coastal flooding and rainfall flooding, thus a useful location for applying the new model to help improve forecasting and emergency management -- to apply the model in a test of its potential for the city's worst-ever rain event. The result: The first flood map of Ida to be released to the public, covering one highly populated urban watershed with over 2 million residents. In an additional sensitivity analysis, the team then simulated shifting the prevailing track of the storm both east (which would have led to higher rain intensities within the flood model's area, given the storm track) and also north, which would be expected to produce lower rain rates. Indeed, the model showed the storm could have been much better (or worse) for New York City's neighborhoods of southern Queens and South Brooklyn. As a baseline, the newly tuned model shows that 8.8 square miles and 4621 buildings were affected by flooding greater than one foot deep. That's bad, but shifting the parameters proved even more dramatic. "During the worst-case scenario, a more easterly storm track, the entire Jamaica Bay watershed area experiences an extreme hourly rain intensity and an average of about 9 inches of rain (24 cm) during the storm," Orton says. "As a result, the area of deep flooding expanded to 24 square miles and 5907 buildings." In the best-case scenario, however, the watershed could have potentially experienced 60% less total rainfall, more like 2.5 inches on average -- a more common heavy-rain event that would have been far better handled by systems and infrastructure. The researchers also simulated various alternative tidal conditions, since Ida's worst surge actually occurred during relatively low and falling tides. The results showed a high tide could have slightly increased flooding for certain areas, such as the east and west shores of Jamaica Bay and Hamilton Beach. "These findings underscore the model's utility in representing compound flooding events, such as for hurricanes that our group has recently shown can bring both extreme rainfall and storm surge," Orton says. "Capturing that compounding effect is particularly important, given that compound floods are expected to become more common and important as sea levels continue to rise."

This limitation is particularly important as researchers incorporate neural networks into operational weather forecasting, early warning systems, and long-term risk assesments, the authors said. But they also said there are ways to address the problem by integrating more math and physics into the AI tools. "AI weather models are one of the biggest achievements in AI in science. What we found is that they are remarkable, but not magical," said Pedram Hassanzadeh, an associate professor of geophysical sciences at UChicago and a corresponding author on the study. "We've only had these models for a few years, so there's a lot of room for innovation." Gray swan events Weather forecasting AIs work in a similar way to other neural networks that many people now interact with, such as ChatGPT. Essentially, the model is "trained" by feeding it a bunch of text or images into a model and asking it to look for patterns. Then, when a user presents the model with a question, it looks back at what it's previously seen and uses that to predict an answer. In the case of weather forecasts, scientists train neural networks by feeding them decades' worth of weather data. Then a user can input data about the current weather conditions and ask the model to predict the weather for the next several days. The AI models are very good at this. Generally, they can achieve the same accuracy as a top-of-the-line, supercomputer-based weather model that uses 10,000 to 100,000 times more time and energy, Hassanzadeh said. "These models do really, really well for day-to-day weather," he said. "But what if next week there's a freak weather event?" The concern is that the neural network is only working off the weather data we currently have, which goes back about 40 years. But that's not the full range of possible weather. "The floods caused by Hurricane Harvey in 2017 were considered a once-in-a-2,000-year event, for example," Hassanzadeh said. "They can happen." Scientists sometimes refer to these events as "gray swan" events. They're not quite all the way to a black swan event -- something like the asteroid that killed the dinosaurs -- but they are locally devastating. The team decided to test the limits of the AI models using hurricanes as an example. They trained a neural network using decades of weather data, but removed all the hurricanes stronger than a Category 2. Then they fed it an atmospheric condition that leads to a Category 5 hurricane in a few days. Could the model extrapolate to predict the strength of the hurricane? The answer was no. "It always underestimated the event. The model knows something is coming, but it always predicts it'll only be a Category 2 hurricane," said Yongqiang Sun, research scientist at UChicago and the other corresponding author on the study. This kind of error, known as a false negative, is a big deal in weather forecasting. If a forecast tells you a storm will be a Category 5 hurricane and it only turns out to be a Category 2, that means people evacuated who may not have needed to, which is not ideal . But if a forecast under estimates a hurricane that turns out to be a Category 5, the consequences would be far worse. Hurricane warnings and why physics matters The big difference between neural networks and traditional weather models is that traditional models "understand" physics. Scientists design them to incorporate our understanding of the math and physics that govern atmospheric dynamics, jet streams and other phenomena. The neural networks aren't doing any of that. Like ChatGPT, which is essentially a predictive text machine, they simply look at weather patterns and suggest what comes next, based on what has happened in the past. No major service is currently using only AI models for forecasting. But as their use expands, this tendency will need to be factored in, Hassanzadeh said. Researchers, from meteorologists to economists, are beginning to use AI for long-term risk assessments. For example, they might ask an AI to generate many examples of weather patterns, so that we can see the most extreme events that might happen in each region in the future. But if an AI cannot predict anything stronger than what it's seen before, its usefulness would be limited for this critical task. However, they found the model could predict stronger hurricanes if there was any precedent, even elsewhere in the world, in its training data. For example, if the researchers deleted all the evidence of Atlantic hurricanes but left in Pacific hurricanes, the model could extrapolate to predict Atlantic hurricanes. "This was a surprising and encouraging finding: it means that the models can forecast an event that was unpresented in one region but occurred once in a while in another region," Hassanzadeh said. Merging approaches The solution, the researchers suggested, is to begin incorporating mathematical tools and the principles of atmospheric physics into AI-based models. "The hope is that if AI models can really learn atmospheric dynamics, they will be able to figure out how to forecast gray swans," Hassanzadeh said. How to do this is a hot area of research. One promising approach the team is pursuing is called active learning -- where AI helps guide traditional physics-based weather models to create more examples of extreme events, which can then be used to improve the AI's training. "Longer simulated or observed datasets aren't going to work. We need to think about smarter ways to generate data," said Jonathan Weare, professor at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences at New York University and study co-author. "In this case, that means answering the question 'where should I place my training data to achieve better performance on extremes?' Fortunately, we think AI weather models themselves, when paired with the right mathematical tools, can help answer this question." University of Chicago Prof. Dorian Abbot and computational scientist Mohsen Zand were also co-authors on the study, as well as Ashesh Chattopadhyay of the University of California Santa Cruz. The study used resources maintained by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center.

From deadly floods in Europe to intensifying tropical cyclones around the world, the climate crisis has made timely and precise forecasting more essential than ever. Yet traditional forecasting methods rely on highly complex numerical models developed over decades, requiring powerful supercomputers and large teams of experts. According to its developers, Aurora offers a powerful and efficient alternative using artificial intelligence. Machine learning at the core 'Aurora uses state-of-the-art machine learning techniques to deliver superior forecasts for key environmental systems -- air quality, weather, ocean waves, and tropical cyclones,' explains Max Welling, machine learning expert at the University of Amsterdam and one of the researchers behind the model. Unlike conventional methods, Aurora requires far less computational power, making high-quality forecasting more accessible and scalable -- especially in regions that lack expensive infrastructure. Trained on a million hours of earth data Aurora is built on a 1.3 billion parameter foundation model, trained on more than one million hours of Earth system data. It has been fine-tuned to excel in a range of forecasting tasks: Forecasting that's fast, accurate, and inclusive As climate volatility increases, rapid and reliable forecasts are crucial for disaster preparedness, emergency response, and climate adaptation. The researchers believe Aurora can help by making advanced forecasting more accessible. 'Development cycles that once took years can now be completed in just weeks by small engineering teams,' notes AI researcher Ana Lucic, also of the University of Amsterdam. 'This could be especially valuable for countries in the Global South, smaller weather services, and research groups focused on localised climate risks.' 'Importantly, this acceleration builds on decades of foundational research and the vast datasets made available through traditional forecasting methods,' Welling adds. Aurora is available freely online for anyone to use. If someone wants to fine-tune it for a specific task, they will need to provide data for that task. 'But the "initial" training is done, we don't need these vast datasets anymore, all the information from them is baked into Aurora already', Lucic explains. A future-proof forecasting tool Although current research focuses on the four applications mentioned above, the researchers say Aurora is flexible and can be used for a wide range of future scenarios. These could include forecasting flood risks, wildfire spread, seasonal weather trends, agricultural yields, and renewable energy output. 'Its ability to process diverse data types makes it a powerful and future-ready tool', states Welling. As the world faces more extreme weather -- from heatwaves to hurricanes -- innovative models like Aurora could shift the global approach from reactive crisis response to proactive climate resilience concludes the study.

Since polar motion reflects mass redistribution within the Earth system, integrating models and observations across the atmosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere is crucial. However, previous challenges in measuring terrestrial water storage, particularly groundwater and root zone soil moisture, limited understanding of hydrological depletion at continental scales. Prof. Jianli CHEN, Professor of the PolyU Department of Land Surveying and Geo-informatics and core member of the Research Institute for Land and Space and the international team employed satellite altimetry and gravity missions, including the Gravity Recovery and Satellite Experiment (GRACE), and GRACE Follow-On, to enable continental-scale observations of terrestrial water storage variations. By integrating this with global mean sea levels and polar motion data, the team has explored terrestrial water storage depletion patterns. Notably, this study introduced novel methods for estimating global soil moisture, which improves the accuracy of continental and global scale modeling to enable a more effective understanding of soil moisture variations under climate change. The melting of Greenland's ice sheet is recognised as the largest single contributor to the rise in global sea levels, adding approximately 0.8mm annually. This study reveals that between 2000 and 2002, the global terrestrial water storage significantly declined, with a total of 1,614 billion tons of water lost to the oceans, which is twice as much as resulting from the current melting of Greenland ice, and equivalent to a 4.5mm rise in sea levels. Since then, the rapid loss of terrestrial water storage has been followed by a more gradual but continuous depletion, with no signs of recovery. In addition, compared to the period from 1979 to 1999, a notable decline in global average soil moisture was observed from 2003 to 2021. Between 2003 and 2011, the Earth's pole shifted 58cm toward 93° East Longitude, demonstrating that the continued decline in soil moisture is leading to a reduction in terrestrial water storage. The team also pointed out that precipitation deficits and stable evapotranspiration caused by global warming, changing rainfall patterns and increasing ocean temperatures are likely the key factors for the abrupt decline in terrestrial water storage. The ERA5-Land soil moisture data of the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts' corroborates these findings, showing substantial terrestrial water storage losses in Africa, Asia, Europe, and South America. In Asia and Europe, the affected areas expanded from northeastern Asia and eastern Europe to broader regions across East and Central Asia, as well as Central Europe, following the sharp water storage depletion observed between 2000 and 2002. With increasing agricultural irrigation in regions such as northeast China and the western United States, and global greening, soil moisture may further diminish in semi-arid areas with intensive agriculture and high levels of greening. The team suggests the need for improved land surface models which consider these factors for a more comprehensive understanding of long- term changes in terrestrial water storage. Prof. Jianli Chen said, "Sea level change and Earth rotation serve as indicators of large-scale mass changes in the Earth system. Accurately measured sea level change and variation in Earth rotation provide a unique tool for monitoring large-scale mass changes in the global water cycle. By integrating multiple modern space geodetic observations, it enables comprehensive analysis of the driving factors behind changes in terrestrial water storage and sea level rise. This, in turn, provides reliable data for climate and Earth system science experts to further investigate drought issues, aiding authorities in formulating water resource management and climate change mitigation strategies to address new challenges posed by climate change."

Urbanization and climate change modify the thermal environment of urban areas, with an expectation that urban disasters from extremely hot weather and heavy rainfall will only become more severe. Mitigating potential damage involves reducing the intensity of the heat island effect and adapting to climate change. Motivated by this problem, a team of researchers at Kyoto University set out to investigate how the reduction in urban heat release could help mitigate and control the rapid development of thunderstorms and local rainfall. The team conducted numerical simulations of a local rain storm using a mesoscale meteorological model . The team selected a rainfall event in Osaka City on 27 August 2023 that occurred under summertime afternoon conditions without the influence of a typhoon or weather front. After reproducing this rainfall event in a series of control simulations with different initial conditions, the team conducted a set of numerical experiments in which they systematically reduced sensible heat fluxes at the surface in land and urban areas, such as urban heat release. When comparing the results between the control and sensitivity simulations, the team examined the impact of reducing sensible heat fluxes over urban areas on the intensity and amount of rainfall in Osaka City. Their results demonstrate that the reduction of heat release in urban areas can lead to the mitigation and control of local-scale rainfall on summer afternoons. "Our study indicates that the regulation of urban heat release as a weather modification method is a promising approach in controlling local-scale rainfall," says first author Kenta Irie. Due to the compounding effects of climate change and urban heating, the increase in weather-related issues is becoming part of daily life in urban and residential environments. It is necessary to prepare for these changes in extreme weather such as heavy rainfall and strong wind in cities, and this research has revealed one way of doing so. "We are excited to learn that regulating urban heat release has the potential to help us deal with urban weather-related issues," says corresponding author Tetsuya Takemi. The researchers are now using a high-resolution numerical model, which represents actual urban environments, to investigate the impacts of heat release from individual buildings and streets in real cities. They plan to combine this numerical modeling and the mesoscale meteorological model to quantitatively assess how to control local-scale rainfall with the reduction in urban heat release. "We hope to further advance our study on urban extreme weather and contribute to further mitigation of these problems," says Takemi.

"Our study suggests that although El Niño emerges as the primary driver of winter rainfall variability in Hawai'i, the Pacific Meridional Mode has a pivotal role in spring rainfall, particularly for Maui and the Island of Hawai'i," said Pao-Shin Chu, study co-author, professor of atmospheric sciences in the UH Manoa School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology, and Hawai'i State Climatologist. "Importantly, our analysis disentangles the respective roles of ENSO and the PMM in driving rainfall variability across seasons and types of weather disturbance in Hawai'i," said lead author Bo-Yi Lu, who was an atmospheric sciences doctoral student in SOEST at the time of this research. "These findings not only deepen our understanding of regional climate dynamics but also offer valuable insights for water resource management and disaster preparedness in Hawai'i and beyond." During what is termed the "positive state" of the PMM, weaker trade winds in the northeast Pacific Ocean between Hawai'i and Baja California occur along with increased sea surface temperatures. During the "negative state," stronger trade winds and cooler surface temperatures prevail. Chu and Lu performed diagnostic analyses using a combination of actual weather and sea surface observations, and weather model-generated data to determine how these patterns affect rainfall variation. They determined that in spring, a positive PMM state precipitates extensive rainfall across the state, specifically, greater rainfall throughout the islands occurs as cold fronts move through. Additionally, whether the positive state occurs in winter or spring, the result is that the leeward sides of the Hawaiian Islands experience an increase in extreme rainfall events, suggesting a heightened risk of floods. Their analysis also showed that a negative state of the PMM corresponded with reduced daily rainfall over windward sides of the islands, potentially exacerbating drought occurrences. As the state of Hawai'i experiences population growth, the demand increases for water for drinking, food production, agriculture, recreation, construction, medical uses and more. "This uncertainty in interannual rainfall, together with the increasing demand for water, requires us to better understand the relationship between rainfall and climate variability," said Chu. "We aim for our research to empower our communities with climate and weather information."

Clouds form upon existing particles in the atmosphere and extreme weather events like flooding and snowstorms are related to production of large amounts of ice in clouds. Biological particles like pollen, bacteria, spores and plant matter floating in the air are particularly good at promoting ice formation in clouds, and EPFL climate scientists show that these particles concentrations evolve as temperatures rise and fall. The results are published in the Nature Portofolio Journal Climate and Atmospheric Sciences . "Biological particles are very effective at forming ice in clouds, and the formation of ice is responsible for most of the precipitation the planet receives worldwide, because ice falls very quickly from the sky. Intense ice formation is also associated with extreme weather," explains Thanos (Athanasios) Nenes of EPFL's Laboratory of atmospheric processes and their impacts, whom lead the study together with postdoctoral researcher Kunfeng Gao. "Given our findings, weather and climate models absolutely need to take biological particles into account, especially since biological particles are expected to be present in larger amounts in the atmosphere as the climate warms up." Indeed, current meteorological and climate models do not consider the effects of biological particles nor their cyclical nature, which means that they are potentially missing important modulators of clouds and drivers of precipitation in the current and future climate forecasts. Mount Helmos, a case study for alpine regions The study takes in account air samples and their biological content collected at Mount Helmos, an alpine area located in Greece. The mountain reaches an altitude of 2350m, has frequent cloud cover throughout the year, and is influenced by biological emissions from the alpine forest below. As temperatures rise throughout the day, pollen, bacteria, fungal spores and plant matter are released from the alpine forest, culminating midday when the sun is at its highest and reaching lows during the night. "We find that the number of particles that can nucleate ice coincides with the number of biological particle counts and they both show strongly correlated diurnal periodicity, and the increased biological particles may contribute to cloud formation that can make them precipitate," concludes Gao. Nenes, who participated at the IPCC scoping meeting in Malaysia to help define the chapters and shape the contents of the 7 th IPCC Assessment Report, says, "the result comes with perfect timing." As scientific coordinator of the large European project CleanCloud, Nenes is currently leading a second campaign at Mount Helmos, called CHOPIN, which benefits from even more instrumentation to help identify the types of biological particles present in the atmosphere that induce cloud droplet and ice formation. A full suite of cloud radars, aerosol lidars, UAVs, tethered balloons and direct sampling of air (with and without clouds) is used to characterize -- with unprecedented detail -- how each biological particle contributes to cloud formation , and which ones are the most effective at doing so, in order to improve weather and climate predictions. Nenes adds, "The data collected will not only be used for process understanding and model improvement, but also to improve or develop new algorithms used by satellites and ground-based remote sensing to study aerosols and clouds. We and the CleanCloud consortium as a whole will be working with the European Space Agency and our sister consortia CERTAINTY and AIRSENSE to help make the best use of the recently launched EarthCare satellite with the ultimate goal of understanding the role of aerosols on clouds and precipitation in a post-fossil world."

A new study led by Flinders University aims to provide a good estimate of water used by trees and plants and bushes under the treetops (or the forest 'understorey') to help improve management of native woodlands. Researchers tested an advanced way to measure evapo-transpiration (ET) patterns in understorey (compared to canopy) vegetation at two different rainfall locations in South Australia to help develop better water and woodland management decision-making in future. ET returns water from the soil and plants into the atmosphere and is the major component of terrestrial water balance, explains Professor of Environmental Science and Hydrology Huade Guan, from the National Centre for Groundwater Research and Training at Flinders University. "Woodland understorey ET is difficult to monitor using conventional methods. Our latest study tested a new method of measuring understorey evapotranspiration in floodplains and catchment areas," he says. This is important to understand because understorey ET can contribute between 10% (in cooler seasons) and up to 50% (during hot weather) of ecosystem water use, researchers say. The latest study, published in the Journal of Hydrology with collaborators from around Australia, China and the USA, retrieved understorey temperature from airborne thermal imagery and used it in a 'maximum entropy production' model (called the 'MEP model') to map understorey ET. Researchers hope to improve ecosystem water evaluations to create more effective management strategies for increasingly scarce river and freshwater resources. The research was based on investigations in a River Red Gum woodland of a Murray floodplain near Bookpurnong in the Riverland and a hilly woodland catchment near Mount Wilson in the Willunga Basin. The locations reflected different topographical, hydrological and climate conditions. Both locations showed understorey ET was a key component of ecosystem water balance, so working out the best way to support River Red Gum and other woodland environmental water requirements could incorporate broadscale monitoring and mapping with high-resolution thermal data from satellites in future. The study found that flooding modified water availability and vegetation response, influencing understorey ET dynamics over time, says Flinders University Professor Guan, who leads the Eco-hydrology and Hydro-meteorology Research Group (EcoH2OMe) at the College of Science and Engineering. For example, after major flooding in 2022-23, the fraction of understorey ET to the total ecosystem ET declined, likely due to increased overstorey transpiration. In the hilly environment, slope orientation plays a key role in regulating ET by controlling solar radiation exposure and soil moisture retention. North-facing slopes generally have higher understorey ET than south-facing slopes, particularly in a wet winter, where understorey ET on the north-facing slopes accounts for up to 50% of total surface ET. This high understorey ET on north-facing slopes consumes soil moisture a lot quicker, resulting in less water for vegetation use in dry summer than south-facing slopes. The study highlights the advantages of integrating new methods and technologies in addressing environmental problems. Meanwhile, South Australia is currently experiencing particularly dry weather, which is most likely the result of climate change, according to the SA Water for Good plan. This means less rain and a reduction of flows into traditional water sources such as our reservoirs, rivers and groundwater. The CSIRO has forecast an overall decline in rainfall of between 15% to 30% by 2050. The SA Government plan emphasises the need for proactive management of non-prescribed water resources to ensure water security to 2050, including a deeper understanding of overall water resource capacity to prevent over-exploitation and enhance sustainability.

Rainfall and clouds form when the water vapor in the air saturates, thus forming small droplets that eventually lump together to form rain drops. According to the Clausius-Clapeyron relation, saturation requires roughly 7 percent more vapor when temperatures rise by one degree Celsius. This relation might, as an oversimplified image, be motivated by a sponge that can capture more water as temperatures increase. An extreme rainfall event in this image corresponds to squeezing the sponge to release most of its water. This hypothesis had been challenged in 2008 by analysis of a long timeseries of rainfall data in the Netherlands. The authors of that study, Lenderink and van Meijgaard, concluded from their statistical approach that the Clausius-Clapeyron relation was insufficient to describe the increase in extreme rainfall, in particular that of thunderstorms which could increase at 14 percent per degree Celsius -- thus twice the rate of Clausius-Clapeyron. In the past 17 years the work by Lenderink and van Meijgaard, now cited more than 1000 times, has led to numerous investigations into the phenomenon, without being able to unambiguously confirm or reject the groundwork laid out by the Netherlands study. In particular, it was difficult to determine, in how far the blend of different rainfall types could give rise to statistical superpositions. The current work takes a detailed look at two precipitation types: stratiform rainfall that is continuous and uniform in intensity compared to short rain showers typical for thunderstorms. "We make use of a large and high-frequency dataset from Germany which is combined with a novel lightning detection dataset. Since lightning indicates thunderstorm activity, stratiform rainfall can be separated in this way," explains Nicolas Da Silva from the University of Potsdam. "The result is rather striking: when carefully selecting only clear thunderstorm rainfall and studying the extremes at each temperature, the increase is almost perfectly along the Clausius-Clapeyron theory," adds Jan O. Härter from the University of Potsdam who is also affiliated with the Leibniz Centre for Tropical Marine Research (ZMT). Equally, when selecting only for stratiform rainfall alone, the data fit the Clausius-Clapyron relation very well. Only when combining the statistics of both types of rainfall, much higher temperature increase rates emerge, as proposed in the study of Lenderink and van Meijgaard. The authors Da Silva and Härter state that this 'super-Clausius-Clapeyron' increase is thus of purely statistical origin such that a long-standing controversy may now finally be settled. However, the current study points out that the statistical 'super-Clausius-Clapeyron' increase in rainfall extremes does apply to clusters containing both thunderstorm and stratiform clouds. Such cloud clusters are responsible for most of the extreme flash flood inducing rainfall. "Assuming the temperature changes projected for the coming decades under climate warming, extreme rainfall may indeed reach unprecedented risk levels for humans and infrastructure, especially in urban areas," the authors stress.

The new study led by the UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology (UKCEH) has shown that a large contrast in soil moisture levels over a range of hundreds of kilometres results in atmospheric changes that increase rainfall area and amount in several megastorm hotspots globally. This increase ranges from 10 to 30% depending on the region and size of the storm. The research focused on mesoscale convective systems, which bring severe flash flooding and mudslides in parts of Africa, Asia, Americas and Australia that collectively have a population of nearly four billion people ( see recent examples, below ). These weather systems, which can be larger in size than England and travel hundreds of kilometres, bring intense storms that kill people and livestock, as well as destroying homes, infrastructure and livelihoods. Impacts of climate change The study, by UKCEH, the University of Leeds (UK) and the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (USA), has been published in Nature Geoscience . Lead author Dr Emma Barton, a meteorologist at UKCEH, said: "Mesoscale convective systems are some of the most intense thunderstorms on the planet, and are increasing in severity due to climate change. Rising temperatures could increase the contrast between wet and dry areas of soils, further intensifying thunderstorms in already severely impacted regions. "Understanding how soil moisture influences storm activity, and how this may change in the future, will be essential for more accurate short-term forecasting to warn communities about approaching storms, as well as making longer-term projections." Widespread damage Improving warnings The new study involved a detailed analysis of 20 years of satellite data relating to storm activity and soil moisture conditions in West Africa, southern Africa, India, South America, as well as computer modelling. The researchers found surface conditions that influence rainfall can be observed two to five days before a storm hits, which will allow advance warning of potential flash flooding. Early warning allows people to move themselves, their families, livestock, vehicles and possessions to upland areas, or to clear blocked drains in advance of storms to limit surface water flooding, for example. The new study is part of ongoing UKCEH research funded by the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC). A previous study found land surface conditions often affect the direction and intensity of megastorms in the Sahel after they have formed, while a separate paper showed that deforestation increases the frequency of storms in some fast-growing African coastal cities. Rethinking forecasting "Meteorologists tend to focus on atmospheric conditions to predict weather patterns. But, as a growing amount of evidence shows, we should also consider what is happening on the land surface to improve forecasting," said study co-author Dr Cornelia Klein, a meteorologist at UKCEH. The study authors explain that greater contrast in moisture between wetter and drier areas over a large distance results in a greater contrast in air temperatures, leading to stronger shifts in wind direction and/or speed as you go higher up in the atmosphere. This turbulence helps storms grow, producing more rainfall over a larger area. In addition to their analysis in West and southern Africa, India and South America, the researchers observed the same connection between soil moisture contrasts and wind circulations in China, Australia and the US Great Plains. So while there were insufficient storm data to carry out a full analysis, they are confident that soil moisture contrasts are also exacerbating rainfall in other regions affected by mesoscale convective systems. Developing accurate tools The next step for the researchers is to explore what factors contribute to these regional variations. They are also using the latest, advanced climate models, which better incorporate storms, to improve understanding of the processes that make rainfall more intense as temperatures continue to rise under global warming. Computer software tools being developed by UKCEH are enabling meteorological agencies to generate more reliable short-term forecasting (up to six hours ahead of storms) and therefore warnings to communities about approaching storms. These include an online 'nowcasting' portal based on satellite-derived data on atmospheric and soil conditions in Africa.

Toward that effort, Texas A&M researchers recently published a report in the journal Transportation Geotechnics on a forensic investigation of a collapsed slope of a Texas highway embankment using a variety of methods, including numeric modeling and laboratory tests. "Failures of embankment slopes are quite common every year," said Dr. Anand Puppala, professor in the Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering. "Repairing these failures involves a tremendous amount of work, especially if the highways are in the middle of a city, for example. In our study, we investigated the reasons for failure of embankment slopes and the best way to repair such damages." According to the Federal Highway Administration, embankments are structures that are made of compacted earthen materials, like soil, rock or aggregate. They raise roadways above the level of the existing surrounding ground surface to provide structural support, prevent flooding and improve drainage from roads by directing water through defined paths. But even embankments can fail over time due to heavy rainfall, snowmelt, seismic activity and construction defects. These failures can lead to loss of life and property damage. Highway embankments made of heavy materials are often built over soft ground and this can sometimes lead to settlement and instability of the embankment. "Most of the embankments in Texas, for example, are built with the local clayey soils," said Puppala. "Embankment slopes made with compacted clayey soils are highly problematic. After 10 to 15 years of continuous use along with the natural impact of weather, embankments tend to fail." For their study, the researchers selected a collapsed highway embankment slope in Houston. They performed in-situ site investigation, collected the soil specimens using a coring barrel and transported the specimens to the laboratory for testing and analysis. Here, the team performed a variety of tests, including basic soil characterization and laboratory experiments, to determine the shear strength of the soil. Next, they used the results from these tests, such as the soil strength, as parameters for a numerical model that can analyze the stability of the embankment slope. In addition, they also used the model to explore scenarios of extreme rainfall on the embankment slope. "The model was telling us that a 24-hour rainfall or an extreme flooding event, for example, can lead to the development of a water table on the top surface, which generally results in the failure of the slope," said Ayush Kumar, a graduate student in Puppala's laboratory and lead author on the study. "Texas soils tend to be quite plastic that increase and decrease in volume based on wetting and drying cycles, making them more susceptible to moisture change." Based on their findings, the researchers noted there are practical solutions that could have prevented collapse of the embankment slope investigated in this study. Their recommendations include using stabilizing agents, like cement, to reduce the impact of moisture and the placement of perforated pipes to drain the water quickly. Although the study is a forensic analysis on the reasons underlying the failure of a specific embankment slope, the researchers noted that a similar comprehensive analysis can be carried out for different slopes and weather scenarios. Thus, this research has the potential to be useful for transportation workers tasked with maintaining roads and highways across the country. "This study is a result of good teamwork," said Puppala. "We've been fortunate to get a lot of help from TxDOT Houston district personnel to get the right samples and then point us to places where the embankment failures have happened. We hope that our study in turn provides a rehabilitation strategy that can be used by different transportation agencies to prevent failure in the future." Contributors to the research include Nripojyoti Biswas from the University of Massachusetts and Benamar Mebarkia from the Texas Materials and Tests Division at the Texas Department of Transportation. This research was supported by the Houston District of the Texas Department of Transportation. Texas A&M University College of Engineering

Published in Nature Communications , the research evaluates the performance of both traditional precipitation phase partitioning methods and advanced machine learning models, revealing that near-freezing temperatures create an inherent limitation in distinguishing between rain and snow, restricting the accuracy of these approaches. Accurately identifying precipitation phase is critical for weather forecasting, hydrologic modeling, and climate research, with significant implications for transportation safety, air travel, infrastructure operations, and water resources management. This is especially true in mountain regions, where accurate distinctions between rain and snow help natural resource managers to better predict and mitigate threats and challenges. While a storm consisting of mostly snowfall may benefit ski areas and water resources, a rain-dominated event may cause devastating flooding and infrastructure damage. Due to the scarcity of direct rain and snow observations, most of which come from airports and rarely reflect the complex weather patterns of nearby mountain regions, scientists and forecasters rely on mathematical techniques that use weather data to estimate the precipitation phase. These precipitation phase partitioning methods -- thresholds, ranges, and statistical models -- utilize data such as air temperature, humidity, and pressure. However, most of these methods only perform well in either cold or warm temperatures when snowfall or rainfall, respectively, are nearly certain. At temperatures near freezing, however, all traditional methods struggle to accurately predict rain and snow due to the meteorological similarity of the two phases. This study figured out why. "The challenge is at those temperatures near freezing, the air and wet bulb temperature distributions of rain and snow overlap heavily" said Dr. Keith Jennings, the study's lead researcher. "This means the traditional partitioning methods cannot consistently separate rain from snow. What surprised us is that the machine learning models did not perform much better. Even by using more data and complex mathematics, they are still trying to tease apart the same information, and they're seeing rain and snow with almost the exact same meteorological properties." To perform this study, the Director of Research at UVM's Water Resources Institute, Dr. Keith Jennings, partnered with scientists at Lynker, the Desert Resource Institute (DRI), the Cooperative Institute for Research in the Atmosphere, the University of Nevada Reno, and Utah State University. They mined two unique datasets of precipitation phase: nearly 40,000 crowdsourced observations across the United States from the NASA-funded Mountain Rain or Snow participatory science project and over 17 million synoptic weather reports from across the Northern Hemisphere. The research team used these datasets to evaluate different methods for classifying precipitation as rain, snow, or mixed. These techniques included a selection of high-performing traditional methods as benchmarks (temperature thresholds and a statistical model) and three machine learning (ML) models: random forest, XGBoost, and an artificial neural network (ANN). While the ML models provided negligible improvements over the best benchmarks, increasing accuracy by up to 0.6%, they still struggled to correctly classify precipitation in the near-freezing range (1.0°C-2.5°C) and failed to consistently identify mixed precipitation and sub-freezing rainfall events. The study uncovered a primary obstacle: the natural overlap in meteorological conditions between rain and snow makes classification difficult when solely relying on surface weather data. Despite advancements in machine learning, there is a limit to how well precipitation phase can be predicted with only thesemeteorological inputs. Dr. Jennings suggests that researchers should switch their focus from marginally improving the inherently limited rain-snow partitioning methods using surface weather data to creating new techniques that assimilate novel data sources. These alternatives include crowd-sourced observations, such as those from the Mountain Rain or Snow project, weather radars, and satellite precipitation products. As climate change drives more frequent rain-on-snow events and alters precipitation patterns, balancing the risks to life, property, and ecosystem function will only become more difficult. However, leveraging multi-source data integration rather than relying on surface weather data alone may offer improvements.

An Austrian research team has now shown for the first time that short-term precipitation and flood events on the scale of a few hours are particularly affected by the temperature increase caused by climate change. For events on a longer time scale, the relationship is more complicated. This finding was made using detailed data collected in Austria over more than a century -- but it can also be applied to other regions of the world. It also allows conclusions to be drawn about which regions will experience changes in the probability of flooding, and how they will be affected. The results have now been published in the journal Nature . Excellent data Climate change is affecting water cycles all over the world. A look at Austria is particularly revealing: "We are in the very fortunate situation of having excellent data available," says Prof. Günter Blöschl of TU Wien (Vienna), who led the research project. Since 1900, precipitation in Austria has been recorded by two separate institutions: by the meteorological service, now Geosphere Austria, and by the Austrian Hydrography, which is managed by the Ministry of Agriculture. The Austrian data are therefore particularly reliable and can be used to make forecasts for other countries. These data sets have now been analysed in a cooperation of TU Wien, the Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management (BML), GeoSphere Austria and the University of Graz. Significantly more frequent precipitation events on short timescales The analysis showed that short-term precipitation events lasting only a few hours have increased significantly in the last 30-40 years -- by about 15%. "This had already been predicted by climate models, albeit with uncertainties. We have now been able to confirm it," says Günter Blöschl. The increase was equally strong on both sides of the Alps -- this is an important result, as these are two different regions in climatological terms. "This clearly shows that large-scale weather systems are not the decisive factor for these short-term precipitation events, because they would be different near the Mediterranean than north of the main Alpine ridge," says Blöschl. "Instead, the temperature increase caused by climate change leads to more intense precipitation locally. This is partly because warmer air can hold more moisture, but also because there is more energy in the system, and stronger warming at ground level leads to stronger upward movement of air masses. Then they also cool down faster, which leads to more rain." A more complicated picture on a longer time scale This is a universal phenomenon: other regions are affected by this mechanism in much the same way as Austria. However, if longer-term rainfall events lasting several days are analyzed, a different picture emerges. In that case, global weather phenomena such as El Niño, a climate process influenced by ocean temperatures, play a much more decisive role. Rainfall events on this timescale are therefore not changing everywhere in the same way. In the Mediterranean, in some regions of Italy, Spain and Greece, long periods of precipitation may even become rarer as a result of climate change. This difference between short and medium-term rainfall events also means that different regions are affected quite differently by floods. "Smaller rivers with smaller catchment areas are strongly influenced by short-term intense rainfall. The risk of short-term flooding is therefore much higher in areas close to such rivers," explains Günter Blöschl. The situation is different for larger rivers like the Danube. They are less influenced by local precipitation on an hourly scale; here, weather events on a daily scale play a more important role, causing floods to increase or change little depending on the hydro-climatic situation. The data collected in Austria thus clearly show that different types of rainfall and flood events are definitely influenced by climate change -- but not always in the same way. If you want to assess the risk of flooding correctly, you have to distinguish between different time scales.

Much of phenology is rooted in the seasons, but in a changing world, researchers are increasingly discovering disruptions to the intricate balance underlying the timing of organisms and their ecological interactions. In a new study published in Nature Climate Change , a team led by University of Arizona ecologist Daijiang Li took a closer look at how extreme weather events impact phenological processes, specifically the flight period of butterflies and moths and the flowering time of plants across the United States. Despite dramatically affecting biological systems, extreme events such as heat waves, cold snaps, heavy rainfall and droughts are often overlooked in studies, as researchers focus more on impacts of gradual shifts in average climate conditions. As a result, there is a critical knowledge gap when it comes to the ecological impacts of extreme weather events on organisms, populations and ecosystems under current and future climate change. "Most studies have focused on climatic variables or seasonalities, such as annual temperatures or precipitation averages," said Li, who is an assistant professor in the U of A Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. "But as individuals, we respond to and make our decisions in response to immediate environmental stress, rather than a 10-year trend, right?" As scientists strive to improve forecasts of how plant and animal phenology responds to global change, it is important to include extreme weather events, Li and his co-authors say. Li's team found that while average temperature has an important role in driving the phenology for plants and insects, the effects of extreme weather are as important as other commonly studied variables. "Our results provide overwhelming evidence that extreme weather events and the climate context in which they occur are crucial to understanding the phenological response in plants and insects," Li said. The research also showed that in addition to affecting plants and insects directly, extreme weather events also interact with climatic variables, Li said. "For example, extremely hot and extremely dry periods can have a compounding effect on the phenology," he said. "These variables don't occur in isolation. Rather, they interact with each other and interact with climatic variables in driving the phenology of plants and insects as a whole." The researchers looked at data collected by citizen scientists through iNaturalist, an app popular with nature enthusiasts that allows users to identify plant and animal species in the field, take photos and upload them to a database. They combined the iNaturalist data with daily weather data recorded from 1980 to 2022. "We looked at about 581 species of angiosperms (flowering plants) and the flying adults of 172 Lepidoptera species (butterflies and moths) from 2016 to 2022," Li said. "We also looked at the spatial distribution patterns, how extreme weather events affect the phenology of those plants and insects, and also whether the plants and insects have similar or different responses to extreme weather events." Of particular concern are disruptions to the delicate relationships between certain species that depend on each other for survival, such as the yucca plant and yucca moth, Li said. The small, whitish moth blends well with the white flowers of the yucca plant, where it spends most of its adult life. The moth pollinates the flowers, and in return, the yucca provides the moth larvae with food. "If larval stages of insects are too responsive to early spring heat waves, they may be more susceptible to mortality when temperatures return to normal or during cold snaps," Li said. "Similarly, if spring is warmer than usual, plants are going to flower earlier, making them more vulnerable to late frost during growing season." Finely tuned dependencies among species are susceptible to disruption, whether caused by long-term shifts in climate or short-term extreme weather events. If the emergence of pollinators, such as butterflies or moths, is out of sync with plant flowering, the pollinators won't be able to find food, and flowers will go unpollinated. While plants and insects often show similar phenological responses to extreme weather, responses can also be quite different, the researchers found. For example, extreme cold spells in the spring prompted adult butterflies and moths to unexpectedly emerge and take to the skies earlier than normal, while the beginning of flowering time in plants was largely unaffected. "Those kinds of phenological mismatches are going to have consequences for both the plants as well as for the insects, causing both populations to suffer," Li said. Li and his co-authors -- Michael Belitz, Lindsay Campbell and Robert Guralnick at the University of Florida in Gainesville -- hope that by including extreme weather events in climate models, researchers will be better able to predict mismatches and their consequences to the ecosystem, and develop effective mitigation and resilience plans in the face of climate change. "This work has the potential to be relevant across multiple sectors, from conservation to food security," said Campbell, an assistant professor at the Florida Medical Entomology Laboratory. "We are still just beginning to more fully understand how extreme weather impacts insects and plants, which ultimately impacts us and our food security," said Guralnick, curator of biodiversity informatics at the Florida Museum of Natural History. "This work is a step towards that goal."

A research team including scientists from Japan's Hokkaido University studied the movement of a glacier in Greenland over six summers and mapped those movements against local weather patterns and tides to explore how these affect the glacier's flow. The results have been published in the journal The Cryosphere . "Short-term speed variations are key to understanding the physical processes controlling glacial motion, but studies are sparse for Greenlandic tidewater glaciers, particularly near the calving front," says Hokkaido University's Shin Sugiyama, lead author of the study. "Studying glacier dynamics near the ocean boundary is crucial to understanding the current and future mass loss of the ice sheet." The team chose the Bowdoin Glacier -- also known as Kangerluarsuup Sermia in Greenlandic -- whose terminus, or tip, calves into Bowdoin Fjord in northwestern Greenland. Like so many other glaciers, it has experienced thinning and rapid retreat since 2008. Researchers placed GPS devices on the ice at various points from the calving front -- from 500 m up to four kilometres -- to measure its speed, as well as sensors that recorded air temperature and rainfall near the glacier. These recorded a total of 90 days' of data from 2013 to 2019. The analysis revealed that the glacier's flow sped up on a daily and twice-daily basis. The first boost is likely because of daily increases in meltwater flow when the daytime air temperature increases, while the second was more evident near the terminus of the glacier and likely a result of the twice-daily tidal movements. The glacier's speed peaked twice a day, either coinciding with or just before low tide. The glacier also showed one or two acceleration events each year which coincided with either unusually high temperatures or unusually heavy rainfall. "The correlations between ice speed and temperature demonstrate the strong influence of meltwater production on the dynamics of a Greenlandic outlet glacier," says Sugiyama. The glacier's flow accelerated more when temperatures rose above 10 degrees C, and there was only a two-hour lag between temperature peaks and speed peaks, which shows how quickly the meltwater drained to the glacier bed. However, the association between heavy rain and glacier speed was more complex, which the researchers think is because of interactions between the influence of tides and the efficiency of sub-glacial drainage. "Our results provide important insights into tidewater glacier dynamics and contribute to an accurate understanding of future evolution of the ice sheet under a changing climate and environment in Greenland," Sugiyama says.

To show how it could be done, a cross-disciplinary team of researchers that included climate scientists, data analysts and a historian integrated data from 19 th century missionary archives in Tanzania with current data for the region provided by climate modellers. They devised a way to quantify the historic records, which tended to be anecdotal as opposed to scientifically recorded. The result was to provide a longer record of climate change in the region than had previously been available, which has the capacity to enhance the accuracy of climate change models. Their work was published recently in Climate of the Past . "The general scientific neglect of the Global South is only now starting to be gradually corrected by institutions in these regions," explained Philip Gooding, a researcher at McGill's Indian Ocean World Centre and the lead author of the study. "Tanzania is typical of many tropical regions in the Global South, in that evidence of climatic changes before the mid-20th century has yet to be gathered or analyzed." Gooding said. "This is partly because climate change research is often more difficult in such regions. For example, it is difficult to conduct tree ring analysis in tropical regions because many tropical species do not provide annual rings, or they respond differently to climate variability. Meanwhile, analysis of lake sediments suggests multi-decadal trends, rather than annual or seasonal climatic conditions." So, he said, researchers looked to historical documents. Missionaries and explorers track changing patterns of rainfall and drought The researchers looked at historical climate records for the towns of Ujiji, Tabora and Mpwapwa in central Tanzania between 1856-1890. All are at a similar latitude, with rainy seasons of similar duration and in similar months. European "explorers" and early imperialists passed through the region from the late 1850s. They noted their observations about the weather and gathered information about previous seasons and years from local people. Representatives of various missionary societies based in Europe came to stay for longer periods from the 1870s. Their records provide a more consistent and reliable source of information, according to the researchers. A record of rainfall patterns over a 30-year period in the 19th century Although their letters and diaries varied greatly in terms of what was noted, the Europeans were interested in documenting climate conditions, including variability in rain, periods of drought, floods and harvests, as well as the conditions of pastures and fields. The information is sufficient, for the period from 1856 to 1890, to provide a picture of climate trends over the long term, especially when combined and integrated with modelled data. Information with a complicated origin and legacy The researchers are conscious the origin of the historic data is problematic and carries with it a complicated legacy. "Missionary accounts of the hardships of droughts acted as one of the justifications for European intervention in African affairs, in ways that failed to increase drought resiliency. It was a heavily racialized, and problematic discourse that infantilized and brutalized those who soon became colonized peoples," Gooding said. However, integrating this data into climate models stands to improve their accuracy, he said. He believes the methodology developed in his study can be applied more broadly in the Global South. "Using climate model data alone is rather uncertain due to a lack of verification with observations over this region," said Melissa Lazenby, a climatologist from the University of Sussex and co-author of the article. "By adding and integrating the documentary data to the climate modelling data, this research provides a more robust and credible picture of what happened in such regions in the past. This therefore helps verify climate models over this data-sparse region and can help in providing more accurate and credible future projections."

Of particular importance for the regional weather and precipitation patterns in Europe's mid-latitudes is the North Atlantic jet stream, an atmospheric air flow that crosses the North Atlantic in a southwest-to-northeast direction carrying precipitation to Europe. In the past, climatic changes did affect the strength and trajectory of the jet stream -- that much is known. But as Dr Warken explains, our understanding of how climate-induced fluctuations in the jet stream influenced local and regional precipitation patterns in Europe is limited. Natural climate archives, like the dripstones in the Cloşani Cave in Romania, can provide information on the climate dynamics of bygone ages. The lime deposits, also known as speleothems, form from precipitation that seeps into the cave's interior over several thousands of years. Geochemical investigations allow conclusions to be drawn about the chronology of the deposits and thus past environmental conditions and precipitation amounts. The current study focused on three stalagmites that contain information on the hydroclimatic conditions in eastern Central Europe over the past 20,000 years. The results show how the trajectory of the North Atlantic jet stream changed due to the warming and melting of the ice sheets of the Northern hemisphere -- a process that lasted until about 5,000 years ago. As a result, precipitation in the late last Ice Age about 20,000 years ago and the early to mid-Holocene -- the current interglacial epoch that followed the last Ice Age about 7,000 years ago -- was 20 to 30 percent higher than it is today. It turns out that precipitation variability in the region over comparatively short time periods of centuries or even just decades fluctuated irrespective of long-term temperature developments in the North Atlantic region. "Our research shows that dynamic processes in particular, such as changes in wind patterns and atmospheric currents like the jet stream, influence the precipitation and weather patterns in Central Europe," stresses Dr Warken. This helps fill in a research gap, she explains, because former reconstructions mainly refer to thermodynamic processes, i.e., the warming of the atmosphere, and thereby directly connect a rise in temperature to an increase in precipitation. These reconstructions are often based on climate models still fraught with uncertainties in simulating local and regional precipitation patterns. "Climate change is already leading to more frequent and intense precipitation events; based on current prognoses, the number of extreme weather events and heavy rainfall in several regions in Europe will continue to rise," states Dr Warken. A better understanding of the underlying dynamic processes is key to more accurately predict future precipitation patterns and the likelihood of extreme weather events. Against this backdrop, the current results from the Cloşani Cave can help improve the accuracy of climate models and prognoses, adds the geoscientist, who together with her research group at the Institutes of Earth Sciences and Environmental Physics of Heidelberg University is reconstructing the climate of past millennia. The research was carried out in collaboration with scientists from the Universities of Mainz and Innsbruck (Austria). Also involved were other institutions in Germany and Romania. The results were published in the journal "Communications Earth & Environment."

In the coming decades, water quality, rainfall patterns, and streamflow regimes will continue to change, according to a new report on water. The report is part of the Southern Forest Outlook from the USDA Forest Service and the Southern Group of State Foresters. In it, a team of seven hydrologists, foresters, economists, and other experts assessed water resources in the 13 southern states, from Virginia to Texas. They found: "Fortunately, forestry best management practices are well-established and will help mitigate the effects of climate and land use change on water quality and availability," says Peter Caldwell, Forest Service researcher and lead author of the report. The team used the Water Supply Stress Index model to project the effects of climate and land use change on water resources across four future scenarios and five climate projections. The future scenarios and climate models are from the 2020 Resources Planning Act Assessment and represent different assumptions about population and economic growth, land use change, and global climate change from 2020 to 2070. Under some future scenarios, forestry best management practices could be challenged by extreme precipitation events, according to the new report. "Given these challenges and the uncertainty of changing future conditions, adaptive management informed by local knowledge will continue to be an important component of forest water management," says Caldwell. Caldwell contributed to the Forests to Faucets assessment and a large body of research on how forests supply drinking water to people in the South and across the nation, with the goal of providing actionable information to prioritize forests and watersheds for management, restoration, and conservation to protect or enhance water supplies. "For the new report we combined hydrologic modeling with a literature synthesis to answer forest and water related research questions that the public and state and national forestry agencies identified as important," says Caldwell. The Southern Forest Outlook is designed to inform forest sector decisionmakers and the interested public about observed trends, anticipated futures, and critical issues based on authoritative synthesis and interpretation of existing science, data, and 50-year projections. The report builds on a rich history of regional assessments of southern forests. Urbanization, markets, and climate change were identified as factors in previous assessments and remain highly relevant. The water report emphasizes the value of keeping forests as forests. Converting forests to other land uses (especially urban use) results in higher concentrations of sediment, pathogens, and other pollutants in waterways. Increases in extreme rainfall events coupled with land use change could wash even more pollutants into waterways. The water report is the second of four in the assessment. A report focused on markets was released in November, and additional reports on fire and forest change are forthcoming.

That began to change in 2016. Several years of decline led to an all-time record low in 2023, more than five standard deviations below the average from the satellite record. The area of sea ice was 2.2 million square kilometers below the average from the satellite record, a loss almost 12 times the size of Washington state. The most recent winter's peak, recorded in September 2024, was very close to the previous year's record low. University of Washington researchers show that the all-time record low can be explained by warm Southern Ocean conditions and patterns in the winds that circled Antarctica months earlier, allowing forecasts for sea ice coverage around the South Pole to be generated six or more months in advance. This could support regional and global weather and climate models. The open-access study was published Nov. 20 in Nature Communications Earth & Environment. "Since 2015, total Antarctic sea ice area has dramatically declined," said lead author Zac Espinosa, a UW doctoral student in atmospheric and climate science. "State-of-the-art forecasting methods for sea ice generally struggle to produce reliable forecasts at such long leads. We show that winter Antarctic sea ice has significant predictability at six- to nine-month lead times." The authors used a global climate model to simulate how ocean and air temperatures, including longer-term cycles like El Niño and La Niña, affect sea ice in the Southern Ocean. Results showed that the 2023 El Niño was less important than previously thought. Instead, an arching pattern of regional winds, and their effects on ocean temperatures up to six months in advance, could explain 70% of the 2023 record-low winter sea ice. These winds cause ocean mixing in the Southern Ocean that can pull deeper warm water up to the surface, thus suppressing sea ice growth. Winds can also push sea ice poleward toward Antarctica to prevent the sea ice edge from expanding north, transport heat from lower latitudes toward the poles, and generate ocean waves that break up sea ice. Using the same approach for the 2024 observations correctly predicted that this would be another low year for Southern Ocean sea ice cover. "It's interesting that, despite how unusual the winter sea ice conditions were in 2023 and again in 2024, our results show they were remarkably predictable over 6 months in advance," said co-author Edward Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, a UW research associate professor of atmospheric and climate science. Antarctic sea ice is important because it affects marine and coastal ecosystems and interactions between ocean and atmosphere in the Southern Ocean. It also affects global climate by reflecting sunlight in the Southern Hemisphere and influencing ice sheets and global currents. "Antarctic sea ice is a major control on the rate of global warming and the stability of ice on the Antarctic continent," Espinosa said. "In fact, the sea ice acts to buttress ice shelves, increasing their stability and slowing the rate of global sea level rise. This ice is also important for marine and coastal ecosystems." As summer arrives in the Southern Hemisphere, the current sea ice extent remains sparse around Antarctica, close to a record low for this time of the year. "Our success at predicting these major sea ice loss events so far in advance demonstrates our understanding of the mechanism that caused them," said co-author Cecilia Bitz, a UW professor of atmospheric and climate science. "Our model and methods are geared up to predict future sea ice loss events." The research was funded by the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Energy.

"Alaska's Changing Environment" provides people with timely, reliable and understandable information on topics ranging from temperature and precipitation changes to salmon and polar bears. The report was led by the Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy at the UAF International Arctic Research Center, with contributions from more that 40 scientists and Indigenous experts across the state. This is the second edition of "Alaska's Changing Environment," which was first published in 2019. The inaugural report proved to be a popular resource for educators, scientists, media, policymakers and others interested in learning and communicating about climate and environmental changes impacting the state. In the five years since release of the first report, extreme weather, climate and environmental events have become more frequent. The State of Alaska declared nearly three dozen weather- or climate-related disasters, about double the 2014-19 total. A dozen of these were elevated to federal disasters. From deadly landslides in Southeast Alaska to Typhoon Merbok along the Bering Sea coast, all regions of the state have been affected. "Alaska's Changing Environment" updates key long-term climate trends. It also highlights the changes and impacts that have emerged or accelerated over the past five years. Though the report covers nearly two dozen topics, the following four changes may be of particular interest to Alaskans. Warmer, especially in winter We've all heard that Alaska is warmer now than when our parents were young, but how much so? Alaska's Changing Environment breaks the warming trend down by region and season. Though overall the state has warmed more than 3°F in 50 years, the biggest changes are taking place in winter. The northern portion of the state is now an astonishing 8.2°F warmer, and even in Southeast, where there are fewer changes in any season, winter is on average 2.5°F warmer. Changing precipitation Both summer and winter precipitation are changing in Alaska. The past five summers have been especially wet. In Southeast Alaska the recent wetness aligned with the long-term trend. Northwest Alaska had been becoming drier, but, since 2019, it has seen 1.5 times more rain than the 50-year average. Most of Alaska is also seeing rain replace snow in autumn. In some areas, there is also more freezing rain in the middle of winter. Across the state, spring is coming earlier and the entire snow season is about two weeks shorter than it was 25 years ago. Extreme events are increasing The frequency and intensity of extreme events like avalanches, landslides, floods and coastal storms are increasing in Alaska. Four fatal landslides have occurred in the past nine years. In 2022, Typhoon Merbok pounded Alaska's western coast, damaging 40 communities. Three consecutive years with high-impact snowstorms have left Anchorage residents reeling. Outbursts from temporary lakes blocked by Mendenhall Glacier have produced record-setting floods in Juneau two years in a row. Salmon highs and lows Since 2020, Alaska salmon populations have seen record highs and record lows. In 2022, 80% fewer king salmon returned to the Yukon River than the 30-year average and 90% fewer chum salmon returned to western Alaska. Since, both species rebounded slightly, but returns remain well below average. Meanwhile, nearly double the usual number of sockeye salmon returned to Bristol Bay in 2022. Also, across the state, all species of salmon are maturing at smaller body sizes. These smaller fish produce smaller and fewer eggs. The visual and concise approach used in Alaska's Changing Environment to communicate environmental change has inspired several spinoffs that explore topical or regional changes across Alaska. To see the entire series and learn about wildfire, berries, Arctic policy and changes to the Bering Sea and Yukon Flats, visit IARC's website ( https://uaf-iarc.org/communicating-change/ ).

PhD candidate Mohamed Almetwally Ahmed and Samuel Li, professor and chair of the Department of Building, Civil and Environmental Engineering, created a method that uses artificial intelligence to more accurately predict short-term river discharge. Using historical data and a novel set of weather-based predictors, the authors based their research on measuring advection -- the rate of water movement -- between two hydrometric stations on the Ottawa River. A test case was created using two stations roughly 30 kilometres apart. The downstream station had been deactivated for many years and the upstream station was still active. Historical data collected over decades by the Government of Canada was supplemented by data on rainfall, temperature and humidity levels, among other parameters. Once input into the machine-learning model, these parameters provided reliable estimates on daily discharge and gave real-time data on how much water was moving through a particular cross-section in the river. "Sub-diurnal forecasting, meaning less than 24 hours, is mainly used for evacuation. This method gives us more accurate forecast probabilities compared to those that make predictions daily or over multiple days," Ahmed says. "These are all based on probabilities, and the probability increases as the forecasting time decreases." A transparent and transferrable model The researchers built on an existing type of algorithm called group method of data handling. This method constructs predictive models by sorting and combining data into groups, where they are computed in different combinations repeatedly until the best and most reliable data combination is identified. "In this method, we use nine predictors: seven weather parameters and the historical data from the two hydroelectric stations. The model ranks and re-sorts these parameters to create multiple combinations until it makes a digital selection of predictors. It is important to note that it does not necessarily use all the predictors or weigh them equally. It uses the ones that prove to be the most accurate," Ahmed explains. The model changes depending on time frame. One that predicts discharge 12 hours ahead will be different than one that predicts eight, nine or 10 hours ahead. The model also changes from river to river. To test it, Ahmed conducted additional calculations on data taken from the Boise and Missouri rivers in the United States. "As this technique matures, we think we will be able to run it in an operational kind of way, where people will be able to check river discharge estimates on their phones, just like they do a weather forecast," Li says. "Instead of giving them the estimates for temperatures or rainfall at some point in the future, we can give them the water levels." To Ahmed, who is pursuing his studies in flood evacuation preparedness, this model is only one tool he hopes authorities can use ahead of disastrous flooding. "I want them to use this data as an input for their models for flood-prone areas," he says. "With this tool, we can help them predict which roads will be available for evacuation, which would give the local transportation system real-time action plans that can save lives and property."

Researchers examined home sales data from the Richmond area on the outskirts of Sydney, along with 2019 and 2023 flood maps for the region. They found a 10.8% price discount in the AEP 100 flood zone, 4.4% in the AEP 500 flood zone, and none in the AEP 1000 flood zone. AEP or "Annual Exceedance Probability" is used to express the likelihood of a flood occurring in a given area each year. AEP 100 is a 1% chance or a 1-in-100-year flood risk, AEP 500 is a 1-in-500-year flood risk, and AEP 1000 is a 1-in-1000-year flood risk. Lead author Associate Professor Song Shi from the School of Built Environment at the University of Technology Sydney (UTS) said digital flood risk maps have shaped people's perceptions of flood risk, however low-probably risk is often dismissed, and maps can be misinterpreted. "Home buyers sometimes think that a "1-in-100-year flood risk" means flooding will only occur once every 100 years, when in reality it means there's a 1% chance of such a flood happening in any given year," he said. "The chance of a flood occurring at least once in an 80-year lifetime is 55% for a 1-in-100-year flood and 15% for a 1-in-500-year flood. The likelihood of experiencing such devasting floods over a life span is much higher than people might think." The study shows that people tend to ignore flood risk beyond the AEP 500 flood risk zone. This can be dangerous, as extreme rain events, such as those recently witnessed in Spain that resulted in a devastating death toll, are rising due to climate change. "In Australia, more than one in 10 houses in Australia are situated in flood zones. Flooding from intense rainfall and overflowing rivers is the most common and costliest natural disaster," said Associate Professor Shi. "More residents are using digital flood maps to better understand their flood risk, and plan for severe weather events. However, our study shows that beyond a certain threshold, people tend to ignore the risk, which can lead to inadequate preparation for floods." The study, 'Cognitive limits of perceived flood risk on residential property values', with co-authors Dr Mustapha Bangura and Associate Professor Sumita Ghosh from UTS, was recently published in the International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction. The researchers found the cost of insurance for a house in a flood zone is a significant financial burden. In Richmond, median priced homes in the AEP 100 zone have an estimated flood premium potentially as high as $4,606 annually, compared to similar homes in a no-risk zone. Residential properties exposed to flood risk are overwhelmingly overvalued, especially in coastal areas, the researchers warn, as property price discounts do not compensate for the additional insurance costs payable. As climate patterns intensify, understanding flood risk is becoming essential for both homebuyers seeking to make informed choices and policymakers aiming to safeguard communities and manage the impact on real estate markets.

During the wet season in the Amazon rainforest heavy rainfall frequently occurs during the afternoon. For clouds and precipitation to develop, tiny airborne particles known as cloud condensation nuclei are required for water vapor to condense and form cloud droplets. But what are the origins of these cloud condensation nuclei? An international research team from Germany, Brazil, Sweden, and China now showed that rainfall regularly induces bursts of nanoparticles that can grow to form cloud condensation nuclei. The scientists analyzed comprehensive long-term measurements of aerosol particles, trace gases, and meteorological data from the Amazon Tall Tower Observatory, ATTO, which is equipped with sophisticated instrumentation and measurement towers that are up to 325 m high. The observatory is located in the middle of the Amazon rainforest in northern Brazil, about 150 kilometers north-east of Manaus, and jointly operated by scientists from Germany and Brazil. Luiz Machado, first author of the study now published in the journal Nature Geoscience , explains: "Rainfall removes aerosol particles and introduces ozone from the atmosphere into the forest canopy. Ozone can oxidize plant-emitted volatile organic compounds, especially terpenes, and the oxidation products can enhance the formation of new particles, leading to temporary bursts of nanoparticles." Nanoparticle concentrations are highest just above the forest canopy The researchers discovered that nanoparticle concentrations are highest just above the forest canopy and decrease with increasing altitude. "This gradient persists throughout the wet season, indicating continuous particle formation in the canopy and an upward flux of newly formed particles that can grow by further uptake of low volatile molecules and serve as cloud condensation nuclei," adds Christopher Pöhlker, co-author and research group leader at the Max Planck Institute for Chemistry. Among the low volatile molecules involved in the formation and growth of natural nanoparticles in the atmosphere are oxygen- and nitrogen-containing organic compounds that are formed upon oxidation of isoprene, terpenes, and other volatile organic compounds, which are naturally emitted by plants and oxidized by ozone and hydroxyl radicals in the air. Earlier studies had detected new particle formation in the outflow of convective clouds in the upper troposphere and suggested a downward flux rather than an upward flux of newly formed nanoparticles. "Our findings imply a paradigm shift in the scientific understanding of interactions between the rainforest, aerosols, clouds, and precipitation in the Amazon, which are important for regional and global climate," concludes Ulrich Pöschl, co-author and director at the Max Planck Institute for Chemistry.

In mid-September, the storm "Boris" produced torrential rains and extreme flooding in Poland, the Czech Republic, Austria and Romania. In many of the affected regions, it was one of the highest amounts of precipitation ever recorded in a five-day period. There were at least 27 fatalities, while countless families were forced to leave their homes. In the meantime, the situation has improved and cleanup efforts are running round the clock. But already the next weather extremes, this time in Spain, are cause for concern. Time and time again, a central question arises in public, political, and media forums: was the catastrophe caused by global climate change? "For the past few years, science has been able to provide robust answers to this absolutely legitimate question," says lead author Dr Marylou Athanase, a physicist in the Climate Dynamics Section of the Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research (AWI). "As early as one or two weeks after a given event, so-called probabilistic attribution studies can be used to draw initial conclusions on how much more probable the event was, due to climate change." The only problem: probabilities are often somewhat intangible, especially when they collide with concrete and exceptional, real-world events. When it comes to external communications -- with the public and decision-makers -- the scientific community has never had a tool that could show the influence of global climate change on the actual local weather in an impressive yet readily understandable way. "That's why we at the AWI have worked so hard to advance a totally new way -- the 'storyline' approach," explains Dr Antonio Sánchez-Benítez, a fellow physicist in the Climate Dynamics Section and co-lead author of the study. "Essentially, we apply the 'what if?' principle. What would a given catastrophe look like in a world without climate change? And what about in a climate that was even warmer? By comparing the hypothetical scenarios with the reality, we can then very clearly identify the fingerprints of climate change -- and not just for extreme weather events, but also for day-to-day weather." Using storm Boris as an example, the AWI experts have now demonstrated what the new approach can do in the Nature journal Communications Earth & Environment . A comparison of the scenarios shows: without global warming, Boris would have deposited roughly nine percent less rain. In reality, however, on its way from the eastern Mediterannean and the Black Sea toward Central Europe, the storm was able to gather in intensity because the water was roughly two degrees Celsius warmer than preindustrial levels -- which meant a correspondingly higher percentage of water vapour in the air above the region. Nine percent might not sound like much, but when it comes to the consequences of heavy rains, it always comes down to how much water gathers on the surface and where it all goes -- can a river, a dam, or a sewage system hold it, or does it spill over, doing tremendous damage in the process? But how did the experts manage to connect climate model-based simulations, which are mainly designed for long-term trends, with the actual local weather? "One important aspect is what is known as 'nudging'," explains Dr Helge Gößling, a climate physicist and team lead of the storyline research at the AWI. "Climate models normally simulate a specific, quasi-random sequence of weather conditions, which is consistent with the laws of physics that their programming is based on. In order to identify differences in the climate, you need to see whether the mean values and distributions change, over a long period of time with a correspondingly large number of weather conditions. Likewise, in weather models the simulated conditions have very little to do with the reality after a few weeks; the actual weather can only be predicted to a limited extent. With the 'nudging', we provide the model with actually observed wind data, including phenomena like the jet stream, and we nudge the model a bit in the direction of the actually observed wind. In this way, we can accurately reproduce real weather in the real climate. Then we change the background climate of the model, for instance to a world untouched by climate change by reducing the greenhouse-gas concentrations and adjusting other aspects, and repeat the experiment." The model used is the CMIP6 version of the AWI climate model, which was also part of the base data for the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report. The wind data fed into the model stems from the ERA5 reanalysis produced by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF). "We have since automated the system to the point where daily analyses on the current weather are run on the supercomputer at the German Climate Computing Center (DKRZ)," says Marylou Athanase. "The data is then transferred to an online tool that runs on the AWI's servers and is freely accessible to everyone at https://climate-storylines.awi.de . The analyses are conducted with a three-day delay on 'real-time', after which they're available online. As a result, interested users can log on anytime to see the 'Climate Change Signal of the Day' for extremes and everyday weather, around the globe and in near-real-time, in the form of interactive maps and timelines, though for the time being, only data on the temperature and precipitation from 1 January 2024 onwards is available. Our goal is to promote a better understanding of the connections between climate change and extreme weather events, and to supply concrete and timely answers that can also be used in media coverage of these events."

"This study set out to extract a paleoweather signal from paleoclimate records using a deep learning model that infers atmospheric blocking frequency from surface temperature," said Karamperidou. "This is a unique study and the first attempt to reconstruct a long record of blocking frequencies based on their relationship with surface temperature, which is complex and unknown. Machine learning methods can be very powerful for such tasks." Training the deep learning model Karamperidou developed a specialized deep learning model, which she trained using historical data and large ensembles of climate model simulations. The model was then capable of inferring the frequency of blocking events from anomalies in seasonal temperature reconstructions over the Last Millennium. These past temperature reconstructions are relatively well-constrained by extensive networks of tree-ring records sensitive to temperature during the growing season. "This approach demonstrates that deep learning models are powerful tools to overcome the long-standing problem of extracting paleoweather from paleoclimate," said Karamperidou. "This approach can also be used for the instrumental period of climate history, which began in the 18th century when routine weather measurements were made, since we only have reliable data to identify blocking since the 1940s, or possibly only the satellite era (post-1979)." Frequency of future blocking events There isn't yet a scientific consensus regarding how climate change will change the frequency of blocking events. These strong, persistent mid-latitude high-pressure systems can have significant impacts for Hawai'i, where flooding has accompanied persistent North Pacific blocks, and also worldwide, for example, in the Pacific Northwest and Europe, where summertime blocking can bring extreme heat waves. So understanding changes in the frequency of these events, especially as they relate to the other big players for climate, such as El Niño and the long-term patterns of sea surface temperatures in the tropical Pacific, is very important for Hawai'i. This study allowed Karamperidou to relate blocking frequencies in the mid- and high-latitudes to tropical Pacific climate variability in the long context of the last millennium, which is essential for climate model validation and to narrow down uncertainties in future climate projections of blocking. Open research and transparency Karamperidou worked with two UH Manoa students to create a unique web-interface to explore the deep learning model and the resulting reconstructions. She highlighted that sharing results and methods in this way is important for Open Research best practices and transparency, especially as the application of machine learning and artificial intelligence expands rapidly into many aspects of daily life. The web-interface is hosted on Jetstream-2, an NSF-supported cloud computing system whose regional partners include the University of Hawai'i Information Technology Services -- Cyberinfrastructure and the Hawai'i Data Science Institute. In the future, Karamperidou plans to explore a range of features and architectural enhancements of the deep learning model to expand its applications for climate phenomena and variables directly related to high socioeconomic impacts.

Unlike previous approaches, which have often focused on shifts in average behaviour, the method used in the study can identify occurrence trends for each daily weather pattern, thereby enabling a direct study of their association with extreme events -- something that was previously unachievable. Thanks to this methodology, it was possible to identify the emergence of new large-scale atmospheric patterns, which are exacerbating regional weather extremes. The study, led by doctoral student Chenyu Dong and Assistant Professor Gianmarco Mengaldo from the College of Design and Engineering (CDE) at the National University of Singapore (NUS), and a collaborative team of international scientists, uses advanced reanalysis datasets to analyse the tropical Indo-Pacific region's evolving weather systems. The researchers found that since the 1990s, previously rare weather patterns have become more common, while some others that were once prominent have nearly disappeared. These changes are linked to shifts in the Pacific Walker Circulation, a key driver of tropical weather and climate, whose future changes remain highly uncertain in current climate models. Detecting long-term trends in the tropical Indo-Pacific has consistently been a challenge, especially on a daily time scale, due to the confluence of several modes of variability that tends to overshadow trend signals. This study is one of the first to investigate long-term changes in tropical weather patterns and their relationship with extreme events on a daily time scale. "Critical changes in tropical weather patterns are significantly aggravating regional extremes, namely heatwaves and extreme precipitation, in the tropical Indo-Pacific region. Our study is one of the first to disentangle trend vs variability in the tropics, an aspect that has been historically challenging. We show that the changes identified cannot be fully explained by interannual modes of variability, and a possible culprit is anthropogenic global warming, though the influence of other factors may play a role. Further in-depth analyses are required to better inform climate modelling and climate adaptation strategies, especially in the tropical Indo-Pacific, where climate models still struggle to provide reliable projections. For Singapore, and other countries in Southeast Asia, improving climate projection capabilities and better understanding how tropical dynamics and regional extremes are evolving is of vital importance. This study is one step towards this direction," said Asst Prof Mengaldo from the Department of Mechanical Engineering at CDE, NUS. Key findings This study was conducted by an international team of climate scientists from leading institutions, including NUS, Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace (IPSL), Uppsala University, Stockholm University, University of Cambridge, Columbia University, World Meteorological Organization (WMO), and the Centre for Climate Research Singapore (CCRS). The team is committed to advancing climate research to better understand the impacts of a changing climate on regional weather patterns and extremes. "The emergence of new tropical weather patterns is a key signal of how anthropogenic climate change is altering atmospheric dynamics on a daily scale. Our findings show a significant increase in heatwaves and extreme precipitation in the Indo-Pacific, which may have profound consequences not only for the region but for global climate as well. This shift in weather patterns challenges our previous understanding of tropical variability and highlights the urgency to improve climate projections and preparedness for extreme events in vulnerable regions," said Dr Davide Faranda, Research Director at the Laboratoire de Science du Climat et de l'Environnement (LSCE) of Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace (IPSL), French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). "Heatwaves and extreme rainfall are two weather extremes that require careful and advance planning from policymakers to mitigate their effects. For instance, more frequent heatwaves may lead to high peaks in electricity demand with possible power outages, many heat-related illnesses that would need enough hospital beds, and crop failure that could threaten food security. More frequent extreme rainfall may lead to floods, which in turn are a direct threat to human life, buildings and infrastructure. Extreme rainfall may also lead to crop failure, contamination of drinkable water, and landslides. Southeast Asia is a relatively research-scarce region in terms of extreme weather, and further efforts are required to better prepare policymakers and local communities for a changing climate," said Asst Prof Mengaldo.

"From East Asia, it was already known that extreme rain events have a strong impact on human health," says Dr. Alexandra Schneider, Deputy Director of the Institute of Epidemiology and Head of the Environmental Risks research group at Helmholtz Munich: "With our current study, we wanted to investigate the global impacts of extreme rainfall events on health." The team analyzed extensive data covering four decades and a wide geographical spread. "To examine the precise effects of heavy rain on mortality, we differentiated the rainfall events by their so-called return periods -- the statistical frequency of such extreme events -- and analyzed their impact on various health risks," Schneider explains. Extreme Rain Disrupts Medical Treatment and Leads to Stress The detailed insights into the connections between extreme weather events and health consequences revealed: The data show a significant increase in mortality rates within a 14-day lag period associated with extreme rainfall, which statistically occurs about every five years. "In addition to the increase in general mortality, the negative effects of these extreme weather events were particularly evident in people with cardiovascular and respiratory diseases," says Dr. Cheng He, lead author of the study and a scientist at Helmholtz Munich: "The health risks from extremely heavy rain can arise from medical treatments being disrupted, medications being unavailable, or affected individuals suffering from severe psychological stress. Airborne pathogens, facilitated by high humidity, are also a possible explanation." On the other hand, the research team observed protective effects on people's health during comparatively moderate rainfall events with a return period of one to two years. These may be due to improved air quality and reduced air temperatures following the precipitation. The study also highlights the importance of regional factors that modify the impacts of extreme rainfall on health: climate zone, vegetation coverage, and variability in daily precipitation of each city. Minimizing Health Risks From Heavy Rain Given the clear results of the study, political action is essential, says Prof. Annette Peters, Director of the Institute of Epidemiology: "In light of climate change and more frequent extreme rainfall events, we need robust health prevention strategies and adaptation measures worldwide, particularly focusing on improving infrastructure and strengthening health systems in the most affected regions." The implementation of early warning systems for extreme weather events and the promotion of green infrastructure in urban areas could also help minimize the health risks caused by heavy rainfall. "It's not just about responding to emergencies, but proactively taking measures to protect the population from the foreseeable consequences of climate change," says Peters: "It's about saving lives."

The review, published in The Lancet Planetary Health and led by the University of Bristol, shows how prolonged exposure to extreme hot and cold temperatures not only carries greater risk of death but could also be linked to many other health issues, including reduced physical activity and dementia. While the negative impact of weather extremes on heart and lung health are widely known, the study unites leading climate scientists, meteorologists, public health doctors, and epidemiologists to give a more comprehensive picture of the far-reaching and interrelated implications. The assessment highlights how more frequent and lasting weather extremes, such as with heatwaves and flooding, exacerbate mental health problems and the spread of infectious diseases. Long-term heat exposure can disrupt sleep, which is associated with cognitive decline and conditions such as Alzheimer's disease. Heat can also heighten levels of kidney disease and skin cancer, while cold weather may result in more injuries from falls, poor mental health through isolation, joint pain, and sedentary behaviour, the study observed. Lead author Dann Mitchell, Professor of Climate Science at the University of Bristol Cabot Institute for the Environment, said: "Chiefly this report shows the potentially very serious mortality and morbidity tolls from long-term exposures to changed weather patterns not currently captured in our climate risk assessments. "We also do not know enough about how hotter temperatures, or continuous flooding, may interact with many different health outcomes, but we are aware of some strong links which give cause for significant concern." Whereas previous studies focus on specific health outcomes, such as heat-mortality, this report provides a holistic assessment based on weather extremes in the UK. Professor Mitchell said: "The collective sum of many world-leading experts in this area means we can pool our knowledge, and use evidence from very different disciplines to give a full overview of how weather and climate patterns impact the UK population. "For instance, warmer nights interrupt sleep patterns, which may speed up the progression of dementia. Multi-year heat stress will likely exacerbate underlying health conditions, such as kidney diseases. We need to focus on these long-term exposures to get the full picture." The interdisciplinary approach could be used to develop an expert-based understanding of the climate-related health burden in other countries. "Using the UK as an example, we have set the stage for a globally-complete analysis of climate and health, which will provide a much-needed update to the current estimate, which only deals with a subset of diseases, and is critically out of date," Prof Mitchell added. Co-author Dr Eunice Lo, Research Fellow in Climate Change and Health at the University of Bristol Cabot Institute for the Environment, said: "This expert judgement is highly valuable because it gives us an idea of the effects of long-term weather exposure on slow-onset health conditions, which have traditionally been hard to quantify in literature. With more and more data becoming available in long-running health studies, the next step is to look at these data and model their associations with long-term weather exposure, along with other factors that affect health over time."

New research by an international team of climate experts shows intense, localised, heavy bursts of rainfall can be caused by a rapid rise of air through clouds and proves that these rises in air can be forecast. The team have developed a unique, cutting-edge modelling system marking a fundamental change in how we identify and forecast life threatening, short-duration, extreme rainfall. Better prediction of these intense downpours will help provide crucial time for communities to prepare for extreme weather which can lead to devastating flash floods such as was seen in Boscastle in August 2004 or London in August 2022. Published in the journal Weather and Climate Extremes , the study was led by the Met Office and Newcastle University, with support from the Universidad de Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa Rica and the Adam Mickiewicz University, Pozna?, Poland. Study lead author, Met Office Principal Fellow, and Visiting Professor at Newcastle University's School of Engineering, Paul Davies, said: "The new model is aimed at enhancing the UK's resilience to extreme weather events, which are becoming more frequent and intense due to climate change. This approach addresses the urgent need for improved prediction capabilities and will help both UK and global communities in mitigating the risks associated with increasingly extreme weather events." Paul added: "In order to understand these extreme rainfall events we have made an exciting discovery: the presence of a three-layered atmospheric structure, consisting of Moist Absolute Unstable Layers sandwiched between a stable upper layer and a near-stable low layer." The new research focuses on the atmospheric properties of the extreme rainfall environment, with a particular focus on the thermodynamics associated with sub-hourly rainfall production processes. It identifies a distinctive three-layered atmospheric structure crucial to understanding localised downpours. and associated large-scale atmospheric regimes which might enable further-ahead prediction of the occurrence of extreme downpours and flash flooding. Study co-author, Hayley Fowler, Professor of Climate Change Impacts at Newcastle University, added: "I am delighted to help to lead such exciting new research which provides a paradigm shift in thinking about extreme rainfall processes. We will further develop this model into an operational system which can help to deliver on the UN's call for Early Warnings for All, which aims to ensure universal protection from hazardous weather, water, or climate events through life-saving early warning systems by the end of 2027. With human-induced climate change leading to more extreme weather conditions, the need for accurate early warning systems is more critical now than ever before." This research offers the potential to develop an 'extreme rainfall warning system enhancing the capability of forecasters and users to identify and predict dangerous flash floods, thereby improving public safety and preparedness. The Met Office is a Category 2 Responder and is responsible for warning emergency responders and governments, and the public about the potential impacts from severe weather and the risks to life and property. Flooding can have severe impacts, and the Met Office works closely with partners, such as Environment Agency, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, and Local Resilience Forum, etc. supporting the delivery of flood forecasts and warnings. The Met Office is also part of the Natural Hazards Partnership consortium which helps deliver co-ordinated assessments, research and advice on natural hazards for governments and resilience communities across the UK.

The analysis also shows that in the Pacific Northwest in the future, less water will be stored in the mountains as snowpack in the winter as warmer temperatures bring more rain. This seasonal shift will challenge water managers and grid operators to rebalance how and when to use dams to produce electricity. "We know the climate is changing and we know that'll affect how much water will be available to produce hydropower," said Daniel Broman, a hydro-climatologist at the Department of Energy's Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and lead author on the new paper. "Our research provides a consistent look across the country, so even if water and energy planners are only looking ahead regionally, our data can provide a broader outlook." The new study published on August 8 in Environmental Research Letters . How climate change affects hydropower Water flows through 2,250 hydropower facilities across the United States, contributing 6% of the country's electricity. Hydropower dominates in the Pacific Northwest, providing 60% of energy in the region. Dam operations don't just consider power, they also consider flood control, transportation routes and water for irrigation and support fisheries and natural ecosystems. So, understanding how water availability will change in the future is important for water managers when planning for their various resource needs. To support this planning, DOE periodically releases a report known as the 9505 Assessment (referring to Section 9505 of the SECURE Water Act). The report provides a detailed assessment of climate change's effects on hydropower facilities. The third of these reports was delivered to Congress in December of 2023. But that report only includes 132 facilities, all federally owned. The power they generate makes up 46% of the nation's hydropower capacity, said study coauthor Nathalie Voisin, chief scientist for water-energy dynamics at PNNL and a lead researcher on the project. To better understand how climate change may affect hydropower generation across the entire continental United States, the researchers added streamflow and hydropower generation data from an additional 1,412 non-federal facilities. The researchers teamed up with colleagues at DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory, who have developed models that show how climate change might alter the timing and volume of water flow in streams and rivers over the next few decades. The PNNL team then ran that water flow data through models that captured the multiple uses of water and calculated hydropower generation for two time periods: a near-term period spanning 2020-2039 and a midterm period spanning 2040-2059. The team found that hydropower production generally increases about 5% in the near term and 10% in the midterm across the continental United States. This could be because climate models generally show an increase in precipitation as Earth warms. Only one part of the country saw an average decrease in hydropower generation: in some parts of the Southwest, which is already facing drought, the models project a slight decrease in hydropower production between 3-6% in the near term. Broman stressed that because the future of climate change is uncertain, the range of possible outcomes for hydropower generation is large. For example, between 2020-2039, hydropower generation could change between -5-21% while in later years it could change -4-28%. Seasonal changes could also have big implications for how water is managed across the country, Broman said. Hydropower changes by season In the winter, the team found that hydropower generation may rise 12% in the near term and 18% in the midterm across the United States. Similarly, increased rainfall during the fall may lead to a near-term 5-20% rise in hydropower production in the Southeast, as well as smaller increases in the Northeast and Midwest. But some of the biggest hydropower generation changes may occur in the summer, especially in the West. In the summer, hydropower generation may decrease 1-5% in the western region of the country, while higher precipitation may increase hydropower generation in the eastern areas by 1-5%, both in the near-term. Historically, mountain snowpack in the West has stored water until the late spring and summer. When the snow melts, that water generates more electricity. Now, due to increased temperatures, less snow accumulates on mountains and melts earlier in the year. The early snowmelt and shift toward rain in the winter means hydropower generates more electricity during the winter and less in the following spring and summer. "Snow is storage. If the snow melts earlier, it changes the timing and volume of water availability," Voisin said. "And because temperatures are rising overall, the hydropower availability and energy demand might not be in sync." The future of hydropower Voisin stressed that even if hydropower generation declines in certain seasons, it still offers a reliable source of energy for the power grid. Like a coal or gas plant, hydropower can be dispatched as needed and provide stability to the grid as a whole -- highlighting its flexibility as a renewable energy source. Broman and Voisin hope that power system operators and water managers can use the new consistent multiscale assessment and the accompanying data to inform water-energy tradeoffs discussions, such as hydropower flexibility needs amid other societal benefits of water uses. With climate change bringing an uncertain future, historical records don't necessarily reflect what the next few decades may bring, Broman said. What's more, "utilities may be thinking about hydropower generation under climate change for their own region, but the electricity grid is bigger than that." This work was supported by the DOE Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy's Water Power Technologies Office as a part of the SECURE Water Act Section 9505 Assessment.

For a paper published today in Nature Communications , researchers in UC Irvine's Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering turned to statistical mechanics to generate a new formula allowing urban planners to more easily assess flood risks presented by land development changes. Co-author Mohammad Javad Abdolhosseini Qomi, UC Irvine associate professor of civil and environmental engineering who holds a joint appointment in UC Irvine's Department of Materials Science and Engineering, said that he and his colleagues were inspired by how physicists study intricate systems such as disordered porous solids, glasses and complex fluids to develop universal theories that can explain city-to-city variations in flood hazards. "Application of statistical mechanics has yielded an analytical model that can project neighborhood-scale flood hazards anywhere in the world," Qomi said. "We can probe differences between cities experiencing flood hazards. The platform has been demonstrated to show links between flood losses, urban form and observed rainfall extremes." Lead author Sarah Balaian, a UC Irvine Ph.D. candidate in civil and environmental engineering, said that we can expect the future to be marked by more severe weather events and that concentrated masses of people, many of whom lack the means of protection or escape, will be heavily affected by urban flooding. "Furthermore, detailed modeling worldwide is presently impossible for many cities because of inadequate data, so our team was motivated to develop a new way of looking at flood risk based on the form of the built urban environment," she said. Co-author Brett Sanders, UC Irvine Chancellor's Professor of civil and environmental engineering and professor of urban planning and public policy, said that the new formula was made possible by thousands of flood simulations across many different urban forms -- simulations grounded in physical laws of motion. "We created a physics-based dataset of flood depth and velocity for types of city layouts seen globally and then used data analysis techniques to derive a relatively simple formula that can be used for planning and vulnerability assessments globally," Sanders said. "The equation can also be taught in our classes so that the next generation of civil engineers is able to anticipate the potential impacts of land development on flood hazards." This project received financial support from UC Irvine's Henry Samueli School of Engineering, the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Education.

But thick dust plumes can also lead to heavier rainfall -- and potentially more destruction -- from landfalling storms, according to a July 24 study in Science Advances. The research shows a previously unknown relationship between hurricane rainfall and Saharan dust plumes. "Surprisingly, the leading factor controlling hurricane precipitation is not, as traditionally thought, sea surface temperature or humidity in the atmosphere. Instead, it's Sahara dust," said the corresponding author Yuan Wang, an assistant professor of Earth system science at the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability. Previous studies have found that Saharan dust transport may decline dramatically in the coming decades and hurricane rainfall will likely increase due to human-caused climate change. However, uncertainty remains around the questions of how climate change will affect outflows of dust from the Sahara and how much more rainfall we should expect from future hurricanes. Additional questions surround the complex relationships among Saharan dust, ocean temperatures, and hurricane formation, intensity, and precipitation. Filling in the gaps will be critical to anticipating and mitigating the impacts of climate change. "Hurricanes are among the most destructive weather phenomena on Earth," said Wang. Even relatively weak hurricanes can produce heavy rains and flooding hundreds of miles inland. "For conventional weather predictions, especially hurricane predictions, I don't think dust has received sufficient attention to this point." Competing effects Dust can have competing effects on tropical cyclones, which are classified as hurricanes in the North Atlantic, central North Pacific, and eastern North Pacific when maximum sustained wind speeds reach 74 miles per hour or higher. "A dust particle can make ice clouds form more efficiently in the core of the hurricane, which can produce more precipitation," Wang explained, referring to this effect as microphysical enhancement. Dust can also block solar radiation and cool sea surface temperatures around a storm's core, which weakens the tropical cyclone. Wang and colleagues set out to first develop a machine learning model capable of predicting hurricane rainfall, and then identify the underlying mathematical and physical relationships. The researchers used 19 years of meteorological data and hourly satellite precipitation observations to predict rainfall from individual hurricanes. The results show a key predictor of rainfall is dust optical depth, a measure of how much light filters through a dusty plume. They revealed a boomerang-shaped relationship in which rainfall increases with dust optical depths between 0.03 and 0.06, and sharply decreases thereafter. In other words, at high concentrations, dust shifts from boosting to suppressing rainfall. "Normally, when dust loading is low, the microphysical enhancement effect is more pronounced. If dust loading is high, it can more efficiently shield [the ocean] surface from sunlight, and what we call the 'radiative suppression effect' will be dominant," Wang said. Additional authors are affiliated with Western Michigan University, Purdue University, University of Utah, and California Institute of Technology.

Californians are familiar with landslides that occur around storms, when saturated soil and rock loses its grip and slips from its perch on the substrate. These types of landslides can be triggered by intense rainfall, and incoming storms can be a warning that neighborhoods need to evacuate. Landslides that happen during the hot, dry summers, though, tend to take people by surprise. In July 2023, for example, a landslide seemed to come out of nowhere to devastate a neighborhood in Rolling Hills Estates, located on the northern side of the Palos Verdes Peninsula in Los Angeles County. Now, landslide researchers at UCLA and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, or JPL, have published a paper in Geophysical Research Letters that shows that the 2023 Rolling Hills Estates event was a slow-moving, progressive landslide that began the winter before, when unusually heavy rainfall infiltrated into the slope and reduced its strength. The researchers used satellite data to measure minute shifts in the surface of the affected area before, during and after the slide and concluded that this method could be used to detect future landslides before they become catastrophic. "Movement on the Palos Verdes Peninsula's Portuguese Bend Landslide has been recorded since the late 1950s," said paper co-author Alexander Handwerger, a research scientist at UCLA's Joint Institute for Regional Earth System Science & Engineering and JPL. "But there was no discernible movement in this region of the nearby Rolling Hills Estates before 2023. People began reporting movement, as indicated by cracks in houses, in April 2023, which matches our observations. There was initial slow movement that accelerated progressively, culminating in complete collapse several months later." The study, led by UCLA postdoctoral researcher Xiang Li, used satellite radar and optical data taken over Los Angeles every few weeks to measure ground motion over time. The satellite radar data for Rolling Hills Estates from 2016 to July 2023 revealed that after very slight movement during the 2019 rainy season, the ground remained stable until heavy winter rainfall, starting in December 2022, kickstarted movement in February. By June, the area had moved 0.04 meters, or about 1.6 inches, and on July 8 -- a sunny, dry day preceded by 40 dry days -- around 10 meters, or 33 feet, of horizontal motion occurred, destroying 12 homes. The likely reason for the delay between initial movement in February and complete failure in July is that it took time for increased instability to develop. The researchers hypothesize that as water seeped through the ground, a sliding surface formed, causing the landslide body, including the ground surface, to slide progressively until the entire landslide moved rapidly all at once. "Formation of the sliding surface will induce some movement, while the collapse will only occur when the sliding surface is fully developed," Li said. "The progression can happen over hours, months or years." The researchers then attempted to determine if the Rolling Hills Estates landslide could have been predicted. By computing the displacement over time, they arrived at a predicted failure date on July 11, three days after the real landslide on July 8. They note that although their results are encouraging, predicting landslides using satellite remote sensing data needs further refinement, and landslides in areas without good historical satellite data might not be possible to predict in this way. Li said that one of the challenges in forecasting landslides is the time period over which the progression takes place. Accurate forecasting requires continuous historical and ongoing satellite radar or in-situ measurements. Handwerger is a core member of a project at JPL that is building an analysis-ready surface displacement database from satellite radar data for the entire United States, U.S. territories, Canada within 200 km of the U.S. border, and all mainland countries from the southern U.S. border up to and including Panama. The project, called Observational Products for End-Users from Remote Sensing Analysis, or OPERA, will contain analysis-ready data for near real-time monitoring and, possibly, landslide prediction. "These motions can be quite subtle before they begin to move fast," Li said. "Cracks in structures are what people tend to notice first. In fact, local residents in Rolling Hills Estates first reported cracks in their houses starting in April 2023. Signs of active movement require caution and monitoring because they could signal a progressive failure in the future."

A Compounding Problem Beginning in 1855 many of America's coastal communities were designed with a combined sewer system. In these systems, stormwater and sewage are collected using the same pipes. Originally, these pipes discharged to streams and rivers; later they were directed toward wastewater treatment facilities. But the pipes can only convey a certain amount of flow. During wet weather events, to avoid inundating the wastewater treatment plants some portion of the flow still overflows into the natural water bodies through features known as combined sewer overflows -- or CSOs. While the Federal Pollution Control and Clean Water Act has pushed communities to upgrade their infrastructure and take steps to curtail CSOs, climate change brings an entirely new dimension to this regulatory compliance challenge. When the water level in the receiving water body is high, the CSO flap gates that ordinarily keep river water from backing up into the sewer pipes can't open as easily. Without these relief valves fully open, the combined sewage generated during wet weather can back up in the system, even spilling out onto the street or into people's basements. As climate change brings more heavy rain and higher river levels, the problem worsens and cannot be mitigated with conventional approaches to stormwater management. "Climate change is making what was already a difficult problem even more challenging," said Franco Montalto, PhD, a professor in the College of Engineering who led the research. "The combination of sea level rise and precipitation intensification is particularly difficult for urban stormwater managers because it means the combined sewer system is being loaded from both sides. In many cases, there's no place for the water to go but up and out onto the street creating environmental and health risks." Montalto's team has been working closely with the Camden County Municipal Utilities Authority (CCMUA) to study potential solutions to this problem. Looking for a Better Answer In their research, recently published in the Journal of Water Management Modeling , the group reported on the results of their detailed hydrologic and hydraulic models of flooding and combined sewer overflows in the Cramer Hill section of Camden. This is a flood-prone portion of the city located very close to the largest CSO point on the East side of the Delaware River. Once they calibrated their models to historical conditions, they used them to simulate how flooding and CSOs would change in the future, as the climate changes. The same models are also being used to evaluate the potential effectiveness of different conceptual solutions. "CCMUA has been working diligently for years to reduce environmental injustices in Camden," Montalto said. "It has worked to reduce odors from its wastewater treatment plant and reduce the frequency and pollution associated with CSOs. It's exciting to work with them now on the development of solutions that can also reduce flooding and make Camden's neighborhoods more resilient to climate change. Our modeling will support CCMUA as it develops multifunctional infrastructure strategies." Drexel's model is unique because it is an "all-pipes" model built by assembling many different geospatial data sets into one computer model. This allows the team to simulate stormwater flows through virtually every surface, catch basin, and pipe in the area. To check the accuracy of the modeling program, the researchers compared the model's prediction of annual combined sewer overflow discharge volume to CCMUA records. Simulated flood patterns were compared to photographs of actual floods taken by the research team during storms over the summer of 2021. "It was important to perform a thorough validation process because we will be relying on this model to simulate future climate and infrastructure conditions," Montalto said. "Not every municipality has been making recordings of all the necessary data to build a complete model, so part of this research was showing that the ad-hoc process we developed could reliably validate our model without some of the data it would normally require." Projecting Future Challenges Montalto's team used the validated model to simulate what would happen if precipitation increased by up to 30% and if the sea level rose by up to 1.8 meters. They simulated each of these climatic changes independently, and together. The model projected that increased precipitation would result in overflow discharges 21-66% above the current annual discharge volume. And, although each of the sea-level-rise scenarios resulted in a reduction in the number of overflow events and annual overflow discharge, the duration of flooding increased with each compounding factor. Testing a Theory One key strategy that Camden has been considering for Cramer Hill's water management challenges involves diverting upstream stormwater away from its sewer system. With Drexel's modeling program, the municipality was finally able to test the idea. Dubbed the "Pennsauken disconnection," the suggestion is to divert stormwater generated in the town of Pennsauken, New Jersey, which is immediately northeast of Camden, away from Cramer Hill's combined sewer system via an intermediary pumping station. The team found that the disconnection will help under all future climate scenarios. However, even with the disconnection, the impacts of climate change and sea level rise still resulted in an increase in the number of flooding events; and a significant increase in the duration of flooding under the sea-level-rise conditions. Setting a New Course Overall, the results suggest that increased precipitation events due to climate change will cause more combined sewer overflows. And sea level rise will make it more difficult for these systems to discharge into nearby bodies of water. Some 40 million people currently live in areas served by combined sewer systems, so this is both a pressing issue and one that could affect a significant number of people throughout the country. Montalto's group plans to continue refining its Cramer Hill model, as they collect information about water flow through the sewage network and surface flooding. They will also model other infrastructure interventions to manage stormwater.

Across Asia, the Pacific Ocean, and the Americas, El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) brings variations in winds, weather, and ocean temperature that can cause droughts, floods, crop failures, and food shortages. Recently, the world has experienced a major El Niño event in 2023-2024, dramatically impacting weather, climate, ecosystems, and economies globally. By developing an innovative modeling approach, researchers from the School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST) at the University of Hawai'i at Manoa are now able to forecast ENSO events up to 18 months ahead of time -- significantly improving conventional climate model forecasting. Their findings, which meld insights into the physics of the ocean and atmosphere with predictive accuracy, were published today in Nature . "We have developed a new conceptual model -- the so-called extended nonlinear recharge oscillator (XRO) model -- that significantly improves predictive skill of ENSO events at over one year in advance, better than global climate models and comparable to the most skillful AI forecasts," said Sen Zhao, lead author of the study and an assistant researcher in SOEST. "Our model effectively incorporates the fundamental physics of ENSO and ENSO's interactions with other climate patterns in the global oceans that vary from season to season." Scientists have been working for decades to improve ENSO predictions given its global environmental and socioeconomic impacts. Traditional operational forecasting models have struggled to successfully predict ENSO with lead times exceeding one year. AI helps power new forecast Recent advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) have pushed these boundaries, achieving accurate predictions up to 16-18 months in advance. However, the "black box" nature of AI models has precluded attribution of this accuracy to specific physical processes. Not being able to explain the source of the predictability in the AI models results in low confidence that these predictions will be successful for future events as the Earth continues to warm, changing the currents in the oceans and atmosphere. "Unlike the 'black box' nature of AI models, our XRO model offers a transparent view into the mechanisms of the equatorial Pacific recharge-discharge physics and its interactions with other climate patterns outside of tropical Pacific," explained Fei-Fei Jin, the corresponding author and professor of atmospheric sciences in SOEST. "The initial states of the extratropical Pacific, tropical Indian Ocean, and Atlantic enhance ENSO predictability in distinct seasons. For the first time, we are able to robustly quantify their impact on ENSO predictability, thus deepening our knowledge of ENSO physics and its sources of predictability." Climate model shortcomings, improvements "Our findings also identify shortcomings in the latest generation of climate models that lead to their failure in predicting ENSO accurately," said Malte Stuecker, assistant professor of oceanography in SOEST and study co-author. "To improve ENSO predictions, climate models must correctly capture the key physics of ENSO and additionally, three compounding aspects of other climate patterns in the global oceans: accurate knowledge of the state of each of these climate patterns when the ENSO forecasts starts, the correct seasonally varying "ocean memory" of each of these climate patterns, and correct representations of how each of these other climate patterns affect ENSO in different seasons." "Different sources of predictability lead to distinct ENSO event evolutions," said Philip Thompson, associate professor of oceanography in SOEST and co-author of the study. "We are now able to provide skillful, long lead time predictions of this 'ENSO diversity', which is critical as different flavors of ENSO have very different impacts on global climate and individual communities." "In addition to El Niño, the new XRO model also improves predictability of other climate variabilities in tropical Indian and Atlantic Oceans, such as the Indian Ocean Dipole, which can significantly alter the local and global weather patterns beyond the impacts of El Niño," added Zhao. Future directions The implications of this research are far-reaching, offering prospects for more accurate and longer lead time ENSO predictions and global climate model improvements. Though ENSO originates in the tropical Pacific, we can no longer think of it as a tropical Pacific Ocean problem only, either from a modeling and prediction perspective or from an observational perspective. The global tropics and the higher latitudes are integral to improving seasonal climate forecasts. "By tracing model shortcomings and understanding these climate pattern interactions with our new conceptual XRO model, we can substantially refine our global climate models," remarked Stuecker. "This paves the way for the next-generation of global climate models to incorporate these findings, improving our approach to predicting and mitigating the effects of climate variability and change. Such advancements are crucial for societal preparations and adaptations to climate-related hazards." The UH team of researchers was rounded out with contributing authors from Columbia University, NOAA, Korea, and China.

Researchers led by the University of Cambridge used artificial intelligence techniques to map slush on Antarctic ice shelves, and found that 57% of all meltwater is held in the form of slush, with the remaining amount in surface ponds and lakes. As the climate warms, more meltwater is formed on the surface of ice shelves, the floating ice surrounding Antarctica which acts as a buttress against glacier ice from inland. Increased meltwater can lead to ice shelf instability or collapse, which in turn leads to sea level rise. The researchers also found that slush and pooled meltwater leads to 2.8 times more meltwater formation than predicted by standard climate models, since it absorbs more heat from the sun than ice or snow. The results, reported in the journal Nature Geoscience , could have profound implications for ice shelf stability and sea level rise. Each summer as the weather warms, water pools on the surfaces of Antarctica's floating ice shelves. Previous research has shown that surface meltwater lakes can contribute to ice shelf fracture and collapse, as the weight of the water can cause the ice to bend or break. However, the role of slush in ice shelf stability is more difficult to determine. "We can use satellite imagery to map meltwater lakes across much of Antarctica, but it's hard to map slush, because it looks like other things, such as shadows from clouds, when viewed from a satellite," said lead author Dr Rebecca Dell from Cambridge's Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI). "But using machine learning techniques, we can go beyond what the human eye can see and get a clearer picture of how slush might be affecting ice in Antarctica." Using optical data from NASA's Landsat 8 satellite, the Cambridge researchers, working with researchers from the University of Colorado Boulder and the Delft University of Technology, trained a machine learning model to obtain monthly records of slush and meltwater lakes across 57 Antarctic ice shelves between 2013 and 2021. "Machine learning allows us to use more information from the satellite, since it can work with more wavelengths of light than the human eye can see," said Dell. "This allows us to determine what is and isn't slush, and then we can train the machine learning model to quickly identify it across the whole continent." "We're interested in learning how much slush is present during the Antarctic summer, and how it's changed over time," said co-author Professor Ian Willis, also from SPRI. Using their machine learning model, the researchers found that in the peak of the Antarctic summer in January, over half (57%) of all meltwater on Antarctica's ice shelves is held in slush, with the remaining 43% in meltwater lakes. "This slush has never been mapped on a large scale across all of Antarctica's large ice shelves, so over half of all surface meltwater has been ignored until now," said Dell. "This is potentially significant for the hydrofracture process, where the weight of meltwater can create or enlarge fractures in the ice." Meltwater affects the stability of the floating ice shelves that fringe the Antarctic coastline. As the climate warms and melt rates in Antarctica increase, meltwater -- whether in the form of lakes or slush -- can get into cracks on the ice, causing the cracks to get bigger. This can cause fractures in the ice shelf, and could cause vulnerable ice shelves to collapse, which in turn would allow inland glacier ice to spill into the ocean and contribute to sea level rise. "Since slush is more solid than meltwater, it won't cause hydrofracture in the same way that water from a lake does, but it's definitely something we need to consider when attempting to predict how or whether ice shelves will collapse," said Willis. In addition to the potential implications of slush on hydrofracture, it also has a large effect on melt rates. Since slush and lakes are less white than snow or ice, they absorb more heat from the sun, causing more snowmelt. This extra melt is currently unaccounted for in climate models, which may lead to underestimates in projections of ice sheet melting and ice shelf stability. "I was surprised that this meltwater was so poorly accounted for in climate models," said Dell. "Our job as scientists is to reduce uncertainty, so we always want to improve our models so they are as accurate as possible." "In future, it's likely that places in Antarctica that currently don't have any water or slush will start to change," said Willis. "As the climate continues to warm, more melting will occur, which could have implications for ice stability and sea level rise." The research was supported in part by the European Space Agency and the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), part of UK Research and Innovation (UKRI). Rebecca Dell is a Fellow of Trinity Hall, Cambridge.

Higher temperatures, extreme weather, melting glaciers, and rising sea levels -- all indicators that the climate and the world's ice masses are in a critical state. However, a new study from the Department of Geosciences and Natural Resource Management at the University of Copenhagen offers a local bright spot. Using hundreds of old aerial photographs dating back to 1937, combined with modern computer technology, the researchers have tracked the evolution of glaciers in East Antarctica. The area covers approximately 2000 kilometers of coastline and contains as much ice as the entire Greenland Ice Sheet. By comparing the historical aerial photos with modern satellite data, the researchers have been able to determine whether the glaciers have retreated or advanced and whether they have thickened or thinned. The study reveals that the ice has not only remained stable but grown slightly over the last 85 years, partly due to increasing snowfall. "We constantly hear about climate change and new melt records, so it's refreshing to observe an area of glaciers that has remained stable for almost a century," says PhD student Mads Dømgaard, the study's first author. However, the researcher emphasizes that the study also shows the first signs of changes in the sea ice off the glacier. This could mean that the stable East Antarctic glaciers might shrink in the future. "Our results also indicate weakening sea ice conditions, making the glaciers' floating ice tongues more vulnerable and unable to grow as large as seen in the early aerial images from 1937. We know from other parts of Antarctica that the ocean plays an extremely important role and drives the massive and increasing melt we see in e.g. West Antarctica," says Mads Dømgaard. Hidden from the Nazis Most of the images used in the study were captured during a 1937 expedition organized and paid for by Norwegian whaler Lars Christensen. The mission aimed to produce the first maps of this part of East Antarctica, but the maps were never published due to the German invasion of Norway. Since then, the images have been stored at the Norwegian Polar Institute in Tromsø and forgotten. When the researchers from the University of Copenhagen read about the expedition, they realized that valuable images were likely hidden in an archive in Norway. They traveled to Tromsø and reviewed all 2200 images taken during the expedition. They supplemented the Norwegian aerial images with images of the same glaciers from Australian surveys conducted between 1950 and 1974. "By comparing the historical aerial photos with modern satellite data, we have gained critical knowledge about glaciers that we would not otherwise have had. I think it's fantastic that these old images can be used to generated new research results almost 100 years after they were taken," says Assistant Professor Anders Bjørk from the University of Copenhagen, who leads the group working with the historical images. Potential for major sea level rise The Antarctic Ice Sheet is receiving increasing attention from researchers, due to its potential for extremely large and rapid sea level rise. Unlike Greenland, very little was known about Antarctica glaciers until the 1990s, when the first good satellite observations became available. "Early observations of glaciers are extremely valuable as they give us a unique insight into how the ice has evolved through a varying climate and whether current changes in the ice exceed the glaciers' normal cycle of advance and retreat," explains Mads Dømgaard. According to the researcher, solid, long-term data is crucial for producing accurate predictions of future glacier evolutions and sea level rise, and this study provides new insights into a vast area in East Antarctica. "The long time series of glaciers improves our ability to make more accurate models of future ice changes, as the models are trained on historical observations," concludes Anders Bjørk. The results have just been published in Nature Communications and are a collaboration between researchers from the University of Copenhagen, the Norwegian Polar Institute, the Arctic University of Norway and the Institute of Environmental Geosciences in France. More about the study - Out of 2200 images photographed from seaplanes in 1937, 130 were selected for the analysis. - The researchers combined the historical photos with modern satellite data to create 3D reconstructions of the glaciers. - The Norwegian aerial images were supplemented with 165 aerial images of the same glaciers from Australian surveys conducted between 1950 and 1974. This allowed the researchers to examine the evolution of the glaciers over different periods and calculate historical ice flow speeds for selected glaciers. - Compared to modern data, the ice flow speeds are unchanged. While some glaciers have thinned over shorter intermediate periods of 10-20 years, they have remained stable or grown slightly in the long term, indicating a system in balance.

Flash droughts arrive suddenly, within weeks, hitting communities that are often not prepared and causing lasting impact. They are an emerging concern for water and food security. The new study is the first to apply a systematic, quantitative approach to the global incidence of flash drought, mapping hotspots and regions of rapid increases in recent decades. "For many parts of the world, we saw flash droughts extending over larger areas, for longer time, with faster onset speed," said Maheshwari Neelam, a climate scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and the Universities Space Research Association. She is the lead author of the study, published in Geophysical Research Letters , AGU's journal for high-impact, short-format reports with immediate implications spanning all Earth and space sciences. The study defined and tracked three critical measures of drought severity: speed of onset, duration and geographic extent. It analyzed 40 years of NASA's MERRA-2 climate data, from 1980 to 2019, drawn from weather observations, satellite imagery and modeled root-zone soil moisture, with the aim of improving prediction and disaster preparedness. "For example, in watersheds in South America, onset is getting faster by about 0.12 days per year, so over a decade they are developing a day earlier. Extent is increasing by 1 to 3% per year," Neelam said. "The metrics can be used by early warning systems to incorporate rates of change in flash drought characteristics in risk assessment and disaster preparedness." South America, particularly southern Brazil and the Amazon, is experiencing strong intensification in all three dimensions of flash drought, aligning with deforestation patterns in the region, high temperatures and less rain. Congo, Angola, Zambia, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Lesotho, and Madagascar are also hotspots. High temperatures were found to be more important than declining precipitation in the African watersheds. Land cover is also important to flash drought vulnerability. Savanna and grasslands are more susceptible to flash droughts than other ecotypes, particularly in humid and semi-humid climates, the study found. In Central Asian watersheds, centered on high mountains, including the Himalaya Karakoram, Tianshan and Hindu Kush, flash drought extent shrank over the study period, bucking the worldwide trend. Climate-driven changes in precipitation, melting snowpack and a shift from snow to rain in the mountains have kept soils moist. These changes can cause an increase in flash floods, which have been observed in the region, Neelam said. Neelam emphasized the importance of understanding landscapes' response to disasters on a watershed scale for assessing water budgets and water management, transcending geopolitical boundaries. "Natural hazards have no political values," Neelam said. "This is why we looked at watersheds and not countries."

A professor of journalism in the University of Nebraska-Lincoln's College of Journalism and Mass Communications, Armstrong began studying alerts related to hurricanes and how Gulf Coast residents respond to them in 2016. The work has expanded to include thunderstorms, tornadoes, floods and drought. "As a professional communicator, I am fascinated by how individuals receive and respond to various messaging," Armstrong said. "It is especially interesting with severe weather alerts, because there is a general assumption that everyone knows exactly what they mean and how you should respond. "Through this research, we've found that is not necessarily true." In her most recent study, Armstrong found that roughly 50% of those surveyed in the mid-south (portions of Tennessee, Missouri, Arkansas and Mississippi) could not accurately define a tornado warning. Conducted with support from the National Weather Service in Memphis, Tennessee, the study showed that just 11% could properly identify the warning as a tornado being sighted or indicated on weather radar -- while 35% successfully responded with one of those two standards. "We've found that many respondents misidentify a warning as a watch, which means conditions are favorable for a tornado," Armstrong said. "The findings indicate that, to reduce overall risk to the public, emergency personnel and disaster communication need to improve their overall messaging." Geography and past experiences with severe weather also impacted respondents' preparation for tornado threats. Survey results suggest that individuals who live in rural areas and those who have been through a tornado were more likely to prep when forecasts call for severe weather. The study also looked at how much warning an individual wants before a tornado strikes. "Those who have past experiences with tornados reported that they needed fewer than 15 minutes to prepare when a warning was issued, but those without that experience wanted more lead time to prepare," Armstrong said. "It indicates that those who have been in a tornado warning know how to prepare and have a plan to take shelter. Those who have not, as is often the case, are less prepared." Armstrong said the tornado alert study, published online May 9 in the Journal of Extreme Events , reinforces the need for individuals and families to make general preparation plans for severe weather events. It was supported by a $15,000 grant from University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. Now, Armstrong is moving forward with a study of drought alert responses in the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Region 7 (which includes Nebraska, Iowa, Kansas and Missouri). The work is supported through a $15,000 grant from the University of Nebraska Medical Center's College of Public Health, with whom she is partnering for the project. "It is going to be an interesting study, because drought is a different animal than other severe weather impacts," Armstrong said. "We have started an initial analysis, but I am very excited about its prospects and the chance to help weather professionals develop more effective messaging for the public."

To conduct their research, lead author Briantama Asmara, who completed this work as part of his graduate studies at UMass Amherst, and senior author Timothy Randhir, professor of environmental conservation at UMass Amherst, focused on the Kais River watershed of West Papua, the western half of New Guinea's island, an area of more than 1,000 square miles. Approximately one-quarter of the watershed has been turned into oil palm plantations. The watershed is also one of the oldest continually inhabited homes for different groups of Indigenous Papuans. "The Kais River watershed, like many of the places where oil palm plantations are situated, is very remote and not particularly well studied," says Randhir. Asmara adds that, "though the palm oil companies have lots of data about what pesticides they're using, the timing of their irrigation efforts, issues with runoff, etc., that information isn't making it out to the downstream communities. I conducted this research because I wanted to get better, publicly available data to the people whose lives are being most affected." Asmara and Randhir relied on a powerful improved version of a watershed model known as the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT+) that assesses how a region's hydrology responds to different land-use scenarios. They then fed the model data on the Kais watershed's land cover, soils, elevations, stream networks and climate data. The team modeled three different scenarios: the historical baseline, using land-cover data from 2010-15; an altered scenario, representing the contemporary landscape with its large oil-palm plantations as of 2015-21; and a future scenario, forecast from 2024 out to 2034, that assumed a steady rate of plantation expansion and which also included the next 10 years' worth of changing climate data. Their findings show that the transition from tropical rainforest to contemporary oil-palm plantation has increased precipitation, runoff and soil moisture. Water quality has gotten dramatically worse since the plantations began: sedimentation has increased by 16.9%, nitrogen by 78.1% and phosphorus by 144%. Though the worst effects on water quality will moderate somewhat according to the team's future scenarios -- the total tonnage of phosphorus carried by the watershed will decrease from 2,418 tons to 2,233.7 -- the water quality will remain far worse, and there will be more runoff than before the rain forest was converted to oil-palm plantation. "The downstream Indigenous people who rely on the rivers and the streams in the watershed are highly vulnerable," says Randhir. "They are bearing all the environmental and public health costs, while the international palm oil companies are reaping the rewards." "And yet," says Asmara, "our research can help. Now that we know what the oil-palm plantations are doing to the watershed, both the industry and local governments can take action." Asmara and Randhir suggest that regulators work to limit the use of pesticides, especially during periods of flooding, conduct continuous water quality monitoring, maintain riparian buffers and, most importantly, ensure that downstream communities have access to up-to-date water quality information.

Such scenarios are not improbable, as the actual precipitation could have fallen several dozen kilometres away. This results in events that are more than twice as severe as the most devastating flood in Germany since 1950. It also shows that regions spared in the past cannot feel safe, as they could also have been hit hard by destruction. The results were published in the journal Environmental Research Letters . Background: Not well prepared for extraordinary events Flooding affects more people globally than any other natural hazard. The July 2021 floods in Western Europe alone caused more than 220 fatalities and damage totalling almost EUR 50 billion. Despite tremendous impacts of exceptional floods in recent decades and their predicted, more frequent occurrence in the future, society is often unwilling to discuss and prepare for such events. Surveys have shown that people find it difficult to empathise with events that they have not experienced themselves: They are then not good at predicting the negative effects of severe flooding. And they tend to judge the likelihood of an event by how easily they can imagine it. In addition, people and organisations generally find it difficult to think about threatening prospects and feel uncomfortable planning for situations that would harm themselves. As a result, society is often surprised and little prepared when events occur that are more serious than what they have previously experienced -- with catastrophic consequences 1 . "The lack of preparedness to think about and prepare for exceptional flooding is worrying, as exceptional events are expected to occur more frequently in a warmer world. Hence, there is a need to develop exceptional scenarios which can also be understood by non-experts," says Bruno Merz, Head of the Hydrology Section at the GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences in Potsdam and Professor of Hydrology at the University of Potsdam. New approach: virtual spatial displacement of past extreme events The severity of an event is often described in terms of return periods, such as the 100-year or 1000-year flood. This expresses the fact that an event of this severity only occurs on average every 100 or 1000 years. The probability of this occurring in a given year is therefore 1:100 or 1:1000. However, this concept is not easily accessible to laypeople. Instead, the research team led by Bruno Merz and Sergiy Vorogushyn, senior scientist in the GFZ Hydrology Section, proposes using alternative spatial scenarios. These so-called counterfactual scenarios are alternative possibilities for past events, i.e. scenarios that did not occur but could have happened. To develop them, the researchers shift the precipitation fields of past floods and simulate the consequences that would have resulted if the paths of the low-pressure areas that caused them had taken a different route. "We assume that it is easy for even laypeople to understand that a low-pressure system that caused heavy rain in a certain region could have developed slightly differently. As a result, a region that was spared at the time could have been hit and an affected region could have been hit much harder -- so they were just lucky at the time," explains Merz. For their study, the researchers selected the ten most damaging floods in Germany since 1950 and shifted the rainfall at that time to three distances -- 20, 50 and 100 kilometres -- and eight directions. Such shifts are well justified in view of the mechanisms involved: The paths of precipitation-forming low-pressure systems are dominated by non-linear interactions on scales of ∼1,000 kilometres or more. Therefore, the precipitation fields of individual events can also develop differently if the overall meteorological situation is slightly different. These 24 counterfactual precipitation events for each of the ten largest disasters were fed into a flood model in order to quantify the severity of the flood for the corresponding regions in Germany. Results using the example of the Christmas flood of 1993 It turned out that the shift in precipitation can lead to much more severe flooding than the actual event. The Christmas floods of 1993 serve as an example: Widespread and partially extreme precipitation in December 1993 led to flooding along the Middle and Lower Rhine at Christmas 1993, leading to several fatalities and inundations in three federal states. In Cologne alone, more than 13,500 households were affected. A counterfactual flood results here from a shift in the precipitation field by 50 kilometres towards the north-east. If the rain would have fallen there, many of the flood-hit locations would have been affected harder. And, in addition, many locations that have been spared from havoc would have been hit by river water levels surpassing flood defences. Areas in the Weser river basin, that was only mildly affected in 1993, for example, would have experienced floods greater than the 100-year flood. Overall, the counterfactual scenarios generate peak discharges at more than 70 per cent of the 516 river gauges across Germany considered in this study that exceed the record floods currently recorded there. Outlook: Utilising counterfactual scenarios for risk management "Given that risk management tends to focus on the largest observed floods, the ease with which our approach generates many new flood-of-records is disturbing," summarises Merz. "Our new approach is able to generate plausible exceptional scenarios that could be used to communicate flood risk to lay people and support flood risk management. Although damages cannot completely be prevented when exceptional floods occur, risk management can limit disastrous impacts," adds Sergiy Vorogushyn. For example, forecasting, early warning and evacuation schemes can prevent fatalities. Spatial planning and infrastructure management can ensure that sensitive infrastructure such as care homes for the elderly and critical infrastructure such as power stations are either not located in hazardous zones or are protected against inundation. In addition, infrastructure management can design backup and redundancy measures for continuous operation during inundation and develop measures that enable a rapid return to minimum service levels if a failure cannot be prevented.

There are several factors that play an important role in the development of floods: air temperature, soil moisture, snow depth, and the daily precipitation in the days before a flood. In order to better understand how individual factors contribute to flooding, UFZ researchers examined more than 3,500 river basins worldwide and analysed flood events between 1981 and 2020 for each of them. The result: precipitation was the sole determining factor in only around 25% of the almost 125,000 flood events. Soil moisture was the decisive factor in just over 10% of cases, and snow melt and air temperature were the sole factors in only around 3% of cases. In contrast, 51.6% of cases were caused by at least two factors. At around 23%, the combination of precipitation and soil moisture occurs most frequently. However, when analysing the data, the UFZ researchers discovered that three -- or even all four -- factors can be jointly responsible for a flood event. For example, temperature, soil moisture, and snow depth were decisive factors in around 5,000 floods whilst all four factors were decisive in around 1,000 flood events. And not only that: "We also showed that flood events become more extreme when more factors are involved," says Dr Jakob Zscheischler, Head of the UFZ Department "Compound Environmental Risks" and senior author of the article. In the case of one-year floods, 51.6% can be attributed to several factors; in the case of five- and ten-year floods, 70.1% and 71.3% respectively can be attributed to several factors. The more extreme a flood is, the more driving factors there are and the more likely they are to interact in the event generation. This correlation often also applies to individual river basins and is referred to as flood complexity. According to the researchers, river basins in the northern regions of Europe and America as well as in the Alpine region have a low flood complexity. This is because snow melt is the dominant factor for most floods regardless of the flood magnitude. The same applies to the Amazon basin, where the high soil moisture resulting from the rainy season is often a major cause of floods of varying severity. In Germany, the Havel and the Zusam, a tributary of the Danube in Bavaria, are river basins that have a low flood complexity. Regions with river basins that have a high flood complexity primarily include eastern Brazil, the Andes, eastern Australia, the Rocky Mountains up to the US west coast, and the western and central European plains. In Germany, this includes the Moselle and the upper reaches of the Elbe. "River basins in these regions generally have several flooding mechanisms," says Jakob Zscheischler. For example, river basins in the European plains can be affected by flooding caused by the combination of heavy precipitation, active snow melt, and high soil moisture. However, the complexity of flood processes in a river basin also depends on the climate and land surface conditions in the respective river basin. This is because every river basin has its own special features. Among other things, the researchers looked at the climate moisture index, the soil texture, the forest cover, the size of the river basin, and the river gradient. "In drier regions, the mechanisms that lead to flooding tend to be more heterogeneous. For moderate floods, just a few days of heavy rainfall is usually enough. For extreme floods, it needs to rain longer on already moist soils," says lead author Dr Shijie Jiang, who now works at the Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry in Jena. The scientists used explainable machine learning for the analysis. "First, we use the potential flood drivers air temperature, soil moisture, and snow depth as well as the weekly precipitation -- each day is considered as an individual driving factor -- to predict the run-off magnitude and thus the size of the flood," explains Zscheischler. The researchers then quantified which variables and combinations of variables contributed to the run-off of a particular flood and to which extent. This approach is referred to as explainable machine learning because it uncovers the predictive relationship between flood drivers and run-off during a flood in the trained model. "With this new methodology, we can quantify how many driving factors and combinations thereof are relevant for the occurrence and intensity of floods," adds Jiang. The findings of the UFZ researchers are expected to help predict future flood events. "Our study will help us better estimate particularly extreme floods," says Zscheischler. Until now, very extreme floods have been estimated by extrapolating from less extreme floods. However, this is too imprecise because the individual contributing factors could change their influence for different flood magnitudes.

But University of Michigan scientists are looking at something a little more tangible: coral. Examining samples from corals in the Great Barrier Reef, the researchers discovered between 1750 and present day, as the global climate warmed, wet-season rainfall in that part of the world increased by about 10%, and the rate of extreme rain events more than doubled. Their results are published in Nature, Communications Earth and Environment . "Climate scientists often find themselves saying, 'I knew it was going to get bad, but I didn't think it was going to get this bad this fast.' But we're actually seeing it in this coral record," said principal investigator Julia Cole, chair of the U-M Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences. "Studies of the future tend to use climate models and those models can give different results. Some may say more rainfall, some they say less rainfall. We're showing that, at least in northeastern Queensland, there is definitely more rainfall, it's definitely more variable and it's definitely already happening." The study, led by U-M researcher Kelsey Dyez, analyzed core samples drilled from a coral colony situated at the mouth of a river in northern Queensland, Australia. During the summer rainy seasons, rainfall filtering into the river picks up nutrients, organic material and sediments, which are then carried to the river mouth and discharged into the ocean, washing over the coral colony. As the corals are bathed in this freshwater outflow, they pick up geochemical signals from the river and record them into their carbonate skeletons. The core samples of the corals display faint bands of lighter and darker material. These bands reflect each rainy and dry season the coral lived through. The bands also hold information about the climate in each season, just as trees' rings record climate patterns during the years it grows. "We want to know, as we warm the earth, are we going to have more rainfall? Less rainfall? Maybe different parts of the Earth will respond differently?" Dyez said. "This project is especially important because we're able to put that warming and changes into context. We are able to record rainfall from the period before we have instrumental records for this part of the world." To accurately determine how much rain fell each rainy season, and how many extreme rain events occurred during each season, the researchers compared instrumental rainfall records that began in the 1950s to the corresponding years in the coral. This gave the researchers a calibration period that they could use to determine the relationship between the coral characteristics and the amount of rainfall that fell each rainy season as long as the corals were alive, all the way back to 1750. The coral core was taken from a remote region off northeastern Queensland by the Australian Institute of Marine Science. The land surrounding the river watershed is also in a protected area, meaning that nutrients and sediment flushed into the river by rains are unlikely to be generated by human activity. "This is a region that has experienced pretty big swings in recent years between floods that have been devastating to communities, and then drier periods," Cole said. "Because northeastern Australia is an agricultural region, how rainfall changes in a warmer world is of real tangible importance. People might not sense a few degrees Celsius of warming, but they really suffer if there's a drought or a flood." To reconstruct rainfall, the researchers used four different measures. First, the researchers looked at the luminescence of the bands in the coral. When they shine a black light on the coral, organic compounds in the coral cause it to fluoresce. The brighter the band fluoresces, the more organic compounds came down the river and were deposited onto the coral, reflecting a season of heavy rainfall. The researchers also measured how much of the element barium is contained in each of the bands. The coral skeleton is composed of calcium, but when barium is deposited onto the skeleton, it can replace calcium. The more barium detected in the band, the more river discharge was flowing over the coral. The researchers then looked at stable carbon isotopes (carbon-12 and carbon-13) within the coral. The more the ratio of these two isotopes favors carbon-12, the more water must have been coming down the river from greater rainfall. Finally, the researchers examined stable oxygen isotopes (oxygen-16 and oxygen-18). When the ratio of these two isotopes favors oxygen-16, it is a signature of additional precipitation and freshwater coming down the river. Because the coral record is located off northeastern Australia, the researchers wanted to understand if the whole of Australia experienced similar rainfall. Looking at instrumental rainfall records across Australia, the researchers found that the increased rainfall patterns did not occur evenly across Australia. "It's not actually that well correlated to western Australia. That's too far away. But for most of eastern Australia, there is a significant correlation. And that's where many people live," Dyez said. "It's especially strong across Queensland, which is where a lot of these rainfall extremes are happening right now."

The cyclonic storms, known as western disturbances, typically bring heavy snow to the Himalayas from December to March. This snowpack slowly melts in spring, providing a steady supply of irrigation water for wheat and other crops downstream. The study, published today (Tuesday, 12 March 2024), in the journal Weather and Climate Dynamics , reveals western disturbances are occurring more often during India's summer. Over the past 70 years, the storms have increased in frequency by 60% from April to July, reducing snowfall and increasing the risk of heavy flooding. Author Dr Kieran Hunt, of the University of Reading, said: "Strong storms are now twice as likely to occur in the north of India in June compared to 70 years ago. With warmer and moister air at this time of year, these late storms are dumping heavy rainfall instead of snow. This raises the risk of deadly flooding like we saw in Uttarakhand in 2013 and around Delhi in 2023. "Some areas of Kashmir saw no snow at all in December or January. This is a serious concern for the 750 million people in the Indus and upper Ganges basins who rely on these winter snows for water supplies. "The loss of winter snow and the increasing late-season storms that heighten flood risks is a one-two suckerpunch that underscores the urgent need to respond to the far-reaching impacts of climate change in this sensitive region." Warming the Tibetan Plateau The research team attributes this seasonal shift to changes in the subtropical jet stream, a high-altitude air current that steers western disturbances. The rapid warming of the Tibetan Plateau -- which is a long stretch of level high ground at the intersection of Central, South, and East Asia -- is creating a larger temperature contrast with surrounding areas, fueling a stronger jet stream that powers more frequent and intense storms. At the same time, global warming is weakening the temperature difference between the equator and poles that normally draws the jet stream northward in summer. As a result, the jet stream is increasingly lingering at southerly latitudes later into spring and summer, allowing more storms to strike North India after the winter snow season. Arriving in the pre-monsoon heat, these increasingly frequent late-season storms unleash heavy rainfall instead of snow, raising risks of devastating flooding. Meanwhile, winter snowfall is declining as the region warms, threatening spring water supplies.

Extreme rainfall is one of the most damaging natural disasters costing human lives and causing billions in damage. Their frequency has been increasing over the last years due to the warming climate. For several decades, scientists have been using computer models of the Earth's climate to better understand the mechanisms behind these events and to predict future trends. In a new study, now published in the journal Science Advances, a team of researchers from the Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA) and the Max-Planck-Institute for Meteorology (MPI-M) led by ISTA postdoc Jiawei Bao used a new state-of-the-art climate model to study how cloud and storm clustering impacts extreme rainfall events -- specifically in the tropics -- in more detail than has been possible before. "This new type of model with a much finer resolution showed that, with a warmer climate, extreme rainfall events in the tropics increase in severity more than was expected from theory due to clouds being more clustered," Bao, who originally started this project during his previous postdoc position at the MPI-M, explains. "We can see that when clouds are more clustered, it rains for a longer time, so the total amount of rainfall increases. We also found that more extreme rain over high-precipitation areas happens at the cost of expansion of dry areas -- a further shift to extreme weather patterns. This is due to how clouds and storms cluster together, which we could now simulate with this new climate model." This new model, first proposed in 2019, simulates the climate with a much higher resolution than previous ones. Previous models could not factor in clouds and storms in as much detail, therefore missing much of the complex dynamics of air movement that create clouds and make them congregate to form more intense storms. While the model simulates the whole world at once, the scientists focused their analysis on the area of the tropics around the equator. They did this because cloud and storm formation there works differently than in other latitudes. Caroline Muller, Assistant Professor at ISTA, adds, "Previous models have hinted at the influence of clouds clustering on precipitation extremes but could not provide the necessary data. In collaboration with our colleagues Bjorn Stevens and Lukas Kluft from the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology, our findings add to the growing body of evidence showing that cloud formation on a smaller scale has a crucial impact on the outcomes of climate change." Collaborative Models Researchers all over the world are collaborating on creating more detailed and realistic models of the world's climate to understand the effects of climate change. Climate models divide the Earth's atmosphere into three-dimensional chunks, each with its own data about temperature, pressure, humidity, and many more physical properties. They then employ physical equations to simulate how these chunks interact and change over time to create a representation of the real world. As computing power and storage are not unlimited, these models have to introduce simplifications and scientist continuously work to making them more accurate. Older generations of climate models use chunks of around 100 kilometers in horizontal length, which still result in tens to hundreds of thousands of them covering the whole globe. Advances in algorithms and supercomputers enabled scientists to increase the resolution of the models more and more. "We used a climate model developed at MPI-M and analyzed the data hosted at the German Climate Computing Centre in Hamburg with a resolution of just five kilometers which was very computationally expensive," Bao adds. "All climate research is an immense collaborative effort by hundreds of people who want to contribute to our understanding of the world and our impact on it." Bao, who first got interested in climate research during his PhD at the University of New South Wales, Australia, and who now works as an IST-BRIDGE postdoctoral fellow at ISTA, wants to continue his work on extreme precipitation events to find more evidence for their causes and impacts using additional models. Caroline Muller, who first studied mathematics and then found her passion for research questions with more real-world impact, and her research group use climate models to study air convection and the formation of clouds and storms at different scales -- up to tropical cyclones -- to better understand their causes and the impacts of climate change on society and nature.

As temperature records tumble, and the threat of bushfires and dry conditions looms large, an international study by Flinders University and Argentinian researchers renews the urgency of calls to make more concerted efforts to prepare for climate extremes in South Australia. Highs and lows in temperature and rainfall indices over the past 50 years have shown an increase in maximum and minimum temperatures of 1.1°C and 0.7°C and less precipitation while pointing to more intense and extended drought periods, extreme summer heatwaves alongside occasional extremes such as frost and flood. South Australia -- often cited as the driest state on the driest continent -- is poised to see more weather extremes in temperature and precipitation with more storm events, longer and more severe droughts and higher temperature peaks up to 3-5°C above current averages likely to follow global trends, the study shows. "We found remarkable warming signal trends in both hot and cold extreme weather events," says Universidad Nacional del Sur researcher Dr Federico Ferrelli in a new article supported by Argentina's National Scientific and Technical Research Council. "This reminds us that we need to focus on climate change mitigation and adapt sustainable management plans to better buffer ecosystems and human health and wellbeing, particularly in areas most exposed to these extreme weather patterns." Flinders University co-author Professor Patrick Hesp, an expert in coastal dune systems, says that if SA's rainfall continue to decline according to such forecasts, "we can expect to see increased soil erosion in dryland agricultural regions and greater mobility of coastal dune systems -- especially on western coast areas where mean annual rainfall is already quite low." The researchers used 24 climate extreme indices based on Bureau of Meteorology data to find a significant increase in extreme hot events -- including summer days and tropical night temperatures -- as well as daily maximum and daily minimum temperatures. While cold indices such as frost days show negative trends, heavy and extreme storms have become more severe locally while rain decreases regionally. Land management practices, including less land clearance, native plant revegetation and more sustainable agricultural practices, is one step in the right direction. While Argentina and Australia are economically different countries, the researchers emphasise that the imminent impacts of climate change are reflected in both temperate climate zones in the Southern Hemisphere and impacting on a global scale. For instance, the Pampas Region in Argentina has experienced substantial increases in maximum, minimum and mean temperatures (1.8 °C, 1.2 °C, and 1.2 °C respectively), with some areas affected by falling precipitation and rising aridity. "Therefore it is imperative to develop sustainable land management policies to address these issues," researchers say. "Global warming effects ecosystems, biodiversity, agriculture and food security, water resources, and human health and wellbeing. "It also contributes to economic and social inequities as vulnerable populations and developing countries are often the hardest hit by the effects of climate change." Including SA's rising 1.8 million population, extreme temperatures could severely impact cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, vector-borne diseases and affect mortality rates, the researchers warn. In light of CSIRO and other climate projections, the Australian and Argentinian scientists say the study further underpins the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and cap global warming projections.

Analyzing 30 years of weather and economic loss data, the team discovered that when atmospheric rivers occur sequentially, the economic damage more than triples the expected losses compared to standalone events. These findings surpass initial expectations, showing the negative impacts of consecutive atmospheric river occurrences. These elongated regions, often described as 'rivers in the sky,' are responsible for transporting a large portion of water vapor outside the tropics. Their strength varies, with the average river carrying water vapor roughly equivalent to the flow at the mouth of the Mississippi River. In extreme cases, they can transport up to 15 times that quantity. Upon landfall, they release moisture as rain or snow. While atmospheric rivers contribute approximately half of California's annual precipitation and replenish the state's snowpack, they can also be associated with extreme events that lead to catastrophic damage. The study, published Jan. 19 in Science Advances, highlights atmospheric rivers' crucial role in providing up to half the region's annual water while emphasizing the challenge of managing substantial water delivery in short time spans. "When it rains, it can take a while for that rain to move through a watershed naturally, and in many places, we also trap water in reservoirs for use during dry conditions for irrigation and other purposes," Serafin said. "Emergency and water managers are constantly balancing flood risks with water shortage needs, especially in states like California where you move between exceptionally dry and exceptionally wet years." Serafin, now an assistant professor in the Department of Geography, mentored lead author Corinne Bowers while a postdoctoral researcher at Stanford. She continued as an advisor throughout Bowers' completion of her PhD last year. Together with co-author Jack Baker, they aimed to better understand a correlation in previous studies: Stronger atmospheric river events (rated on a scale of 1 to 5) led to higher economic losses in California. The researchers noted a significant trend in median flood losses but emphasized a wide range around each median. "For example, prior research found that a category 3 or 4 event could produce losses between $10,000 to over $1 billion across the state," Serafin said. "A category 5 event could produce losses between about $5 million to over $1 billion." Based on anecdotal evidence and recent events, the team hypothesized that consecutive atmospheric river events might be more damaging than isolated, single events -- contrary to the traditional categorization of losses. "We're generally really worried about individual large events that cause hazards and how these events might change in the future -- this applies not only to atmospheric rivers but also to hurricanes, which maybe we're a little more familiar with here in Florida," Serafin said. She recalls the exacerbating impacts felt across the state in the 2022 hurricane season, when Hurricanes Ian and Nicole packed a double punch to coastlines within six weeks of each other, causing major dune erosion and widespread structural damage. She cautions that while compounding weather events is a hot topic right now, and a lot of research has examined clusters of events and their formation, there is less focus on demonstrating the overall impacts of these events. "Our results further add to the necessity of viewing flood risks from atmospheric rivers in a broad lens," she said, "taking into account what has happened over the past few weeks to months with current forecasts and predictions." The researchers hope their findings can provide a new perspective to help the broader public better prepare for flood risks by clearly communicating the compound nature of these risks. "Our work really shows that we need to consider the likelihood for multiple, back-to-back events for predicting damages, because damage from multiple events could be far worse than from one event alone," Serafin said.

An increasing area of interest to researchers is the frequency of compound drought and pluvial flooding (caused by quick, heavy rainfall or sustained rainfall beyond the norm), which is when both occur in succession in the same area within a year of each other. Historically, this level of coincidence has been under-examined. Of similar interest is when the reverse happens: extreme rainfall followed by a meteorological drought. Meteorological drought is when dry weather patterns prevail, which can eventually trigger hydrological drought, leading to dry streams and plunging reservoir levels, such as what happened at Lake Mead in 2022. A new study co-authored by researchers in the University of Arkansas Department of Geosciences, as well as colleagues in China, now provides a global examination of drought-pluvial volatility -- or the tendency to shift from one extreme to another (from dry to wet or wet to dry) in a short period of time. Yichan Li, a Ph.D. candidate at the U of A, was the first of four authors on the paper, "Observational Uncertainty for Global Drought-Pluvial Volatility," published in Water Resources Research , while Linyin Cheng, an assistant professor of geosciences, was second author. The study looks at extreme dry-to-wet and wet-to-dry transitions over the past seven decades through event coincidence analysis, a method of quantifying the number of consecutive extreme events that also considers instantaneous or lagged responses within an uncertain period between them. The study used three widely used climate data sets to provide evidence of increased drought-pluvial volatility on time scales of less than a year. The team also evaluated the accuracy of these data sets, finding varying strengths and weaknesses of each due to observational uncertainties in data collection. For instance, the remoteness of a region may play a role in collecting accurate data. Averaged out at the global scale, the team found that 15.46% of all meteorological droughts were succeeded by a pluvial the following season. The wet-to-dry transition percentage proved remarkably similar: 15.49%. However, prominent differences exist when looking at particular regions. Toward that end, the study provides a map demonstrating how incidents of these two phenomena are distributed globally. Overall, the spatial pattern of extreme dry-to-wet and wet-to-dry events' coincidence rates is largely in agreement among the three data sets, though there is prominent regional variability. For instance, in Eurasia since the mid-20th century, there is a relatively low probability for meteorological droughts transitioning to pluvials, but a higher chance for the opposite scenario, rapid shifts from wet to dry events. A similar pattern also exists over western North America, which sees severe wet to dry transitions at a frequency greater than 17% on average. Conversely, South Asia and Australia are more prone to immediate transitions from meteorological droughts to pluvials. The authors noted: "Our findings indicate that differences associated with drought-pluvial volatility among the considered observations are in many regions larger than that of their single events [droughts or pluvials alone], highlighting a need of to use multiple independent observation-based data sets for more robust examinations when studying such compound extreme events." Ultimately, the authors stress the need to use multiple independent observation-based data sets when analyzing extreme, compound dry-to-wet events. This will provide clearer guidelines for climate-related decision making, especially water resources planning, as well as ensure better accuracy when modeling future weather events. Additional co-authors in the paper included Chiyun Miao, with Beijing Normal University and Zhiyong Liu, with Sun Yat-sen University.

Many natural disasters, such as flooding or landslides, are directly caused by extreme precipitation. Researchers expect that increasing average temperatures will cause extreme precipitation events to further increase. To adapt to a changing climate and prepare for disasters at an early stage, precise local and global data on the current and future water cycle are indispensable. "Precipitation is highly variable in space and time and, hence, difficult to forecast, in particular on the local level," says Dr. Christian Chwala from the Atmospheric Environmental Research Division of KIT's Institute of Meteorology and Climate Research (IMK-IFU), KIT's Campus Alpine in Garmisch-Partenkirchen." For this reason, we want to enhance the resolution of precipitation fields generated e.g. by global climate models and improve their classification as regards possible threats, such as floodings." Higher Resolution for More Precise Regional Climate Models Currently used global climate models are based on a grid that is not fine enough to precisely present the variability of precipitation. Highly resolved precipitation maps can only be produced with computationally expensive and, hence, spatially or temporally limited models. "For this reason, we have developed an AI-based generative neural network, called GAN, and trained it with high-resolution radar precipitation fields. In this way, the GAN learns how to generate realistic precipitation fields and derive their temporal sequence from coarsely resolved data," says Luca Glawion from IMK-IFU. "The network is able to generate highly resolved radar precipitation films from very coarsely resolved maps." These refined radar maps not only show how rain cells develop and move, but precisely reconstruct local rain statistics and the corresponding extreme value distribution. "Our method serves as a basis to increase the resolution of coarsely grained precipitation fields, such that the high spatial and temporal variability of precipitation can be reproduced adequately and local effects can be studied," says Julius Polz from IMK-IFU. "Our deep learning method is quicker by several orders of magnitude than the calculation of such highly resolved precipitation fields with numerical weather models usually applied to regionally refine data of global climate models." The researchers point out that their method also generates an ensemble of different potential precipitation fields. This is important, as a multitude of physically plausible highly resolved solutions exists for each coarsely resolved precipitation field. Similar to a weather forecast, an ensemble allows for a more precise determination of the associated uncertainty. Higher Resolution for Better Forecasts under Climate Change The results show that the AI model and methodology developed by the researchers will enable future use of neural networks to improve the spatial and temporal resolution of precipitation calculated by climate models. This will allow for a more precise analysis of the impacts and developments of precipitation in a changing climate. "In a next step, we will apply the method to global climate simulations that transfer specific large-scale weather situations to a future world with a changed climate, e.g. to the year of 2100. The higher resolution of precipitation events simulated with our method will allow for a better estimation of the impacts the weather conditions that caused the flooding of the river Ahr in 2021 would have had in a world warmer by 2 degrees," Glawion explains. Such information is of decisive importance to develop climate adaptation methods.

The researchers analyzed the impacts of decreased sea ice in the Amundsen Sea in West Antarctica and found the ice-free ocean surface leads to more moisture in the atmosphere and heavier snowfalls on the ice sheet, the team reported in the journal Geophysical Research Letters. While the additional snowfall is not enough to offset the impacts of melting ice, including it in climate models may improve predictions of things like sea level rise, said Luke Trusel, assistant professor of geography at Penn State and co-author of the study. The Antarctic ice sheet plays a significant role in global sea level dynamics. As one of the world's largest reservoirs of freshwater, any change in its volume directly impacts sea levels. Trusel noted that while popular attention is often on visible processes like chunks of ice breaking away, or calving, and floating away as icebergs, more subtle interactions -- like snowfall on the ice sheet -- can be equally significant. "For a place like Antarctica, which is just massive, the amount of snow falling on top of the ice sheet is as important or even more important than other processes like meltwater or ice breaking off," Trusel said. "We're tracking both snowfall and melt to understand both ends of the equation -- what takes from sea level and what gets returned to the ocean. We want to know how those factors are impacting the ice sheets." The primary source of snowfall in Antarctica is evaporation from the surrounding oceans, with sea ice playing a pivotal role in modulating this process, according to researchers. "Sea ice is significant," said Jessica Kromer, a doctoral candidate at Penn State and lead author. "It reflects sunlight, aids in cooling the planet and influences interactions between the atmosphere and ocean, including oceanic evaporation. We found that precipitation varies so much year to year. In some years, precipitation can take away from sea level or lessen the impact of the ice discharged from the sheets." Using satellite observations and climate data, the researchers analyzed the relationship between the ocean surface, atmosphere and Antarctic ice sheet's mass. Their findings highlighted that during periods of reduced sea ice, the atmosphere retained more moisture. This moisture, when reaching the colder ice sheet boundaries, condenses, leading to increased snowfall. The findings, researchers said, suggest that as global temperatures inch upwards and Antarctica warms, shrinking sea ice levels will amplify oceanic evaporation and consequent precipitation over Antarctica. This increased snowfall can momentarily stave off rising sea levels. However, sea levels will still rise overall. "With global warming, there's an expectation of reduced sea ice," Trusel said. "As sea ice diminishes, there could be increased evaporation from the ocean leading to more precipitation over Antarctica. While this might appear to offset the loss of sea ice, the implications are multifaceted. Increased snowfall in Antarctica might slow the sea level rise, but it's essential to recognize that the ice sheet will continue to contribute to rising sea levels." The scientists identified a feedback loop between sea ice and atmospheric water vapor. A more ice-free ocean surface intensifies evaporation, contributing to increased atmospheric water vapor. This enhanced moisture causes a locally amplified greenhouse effect, resulting in heightened downward longwave radiation, which subsequently reduces sea ice the next month. Kromer highlighted recent satellite data, which indicates notable changes in the patterns of sea ice. "While Arctic sea ice has been rapidly declining over the satellite record, the Antarctic experienced a slight increase until 2015, followed by a sharp decline in 2016," Kromer said. "In 2022, we witnessed a new record low, and this year's levels are even lower, significantly below previous observations. These recent rapid changes in Antarctic sea ice highlight the urgency of understanding their causes and their potential impact on the Antarctic ice sheet." The team's findings emphasize the need for refining current climate models to enhance their predictive accuracy, the scientists said. "If we aim to project future sea level changes with precision, it's essential to enhance our models, particularly in representing sea ice dynamics," Trusel said. The NASA Cryospheric Sciences Program supported this work.

In a paper published today in Nature Climate Change , an international team of academics explore the ways in which research has shown that a changing environment affects how our brains work, and how climate change could impact our brain function in the future. The paper is led by the University of Vienna with input from the universities of Geneva, New York, Chicago, Washington, Stanford, Exeter in the UK and the Max Plank Institute in Berlin. It also explores the role that neuroscientists can play in further understanding and addressing these challenges. Lead author Dr Kimberly C. Doell, of the University of Vienna, said: "We've long known that factors in our environment can lead to changes in the brain. Yet we're only just beginning to look at how climate change, the greatest global threat of our time, might change our brains. Given the increasingly frequent extreme weather events we're already experiencing, alongside factors such as air pollution, the way we access nature and the stress and anxiety people experience around climate change, it's crucial that we understand the impact this could all have on our brains. Only then can we start to find ways to mitigate these changes." Since the 1940s, scientists have known from mouse studies that changing environmental factors can profoundly change the development and plasticity of the brain. This effect as also been seen in humans in research looking at the effects of growing up in poverty, which found disturbances to brain systems, including lack of cognitive stimulation, exposure to toxins, poor nutrition, and heightened childhood stress. While not entirely surprising, this research highlights the profound impact that one's environment can have on their brain. Now, the authors are calling for research to explore the impact on the human brain of being exposed to more extreme weather events, such as heatwaves, droughts, and hurricanes, and associated forest fires and floods. They believe such events may change brain structure, function, and overall health, and also call for more research to evaluate how this may explain changes in well-being and behaviour. The paper also explores the role that neuroscience can play in influencing the way we think about climate change, our judgments and how we respond. Dr Mathew White, of the Universities of Exeter and Vienna, is a co-author on the study. He said: "Understanding neural activity that is relevant to motivations, emotions and temporal horizons may help predict behaviour, and improve our understanding of, underlying barriers preventing people from behaving as pro-environmentally as they might wish. Both brain function and climate change are highly complex areas. We need to start seeing them as interlinked, and to take action to protect our brains against the future realities of climate change, and start using our brains better to cope with what is already happening and prevent the worse-case scenarios."

In late September of this year, flash-flooding surged down neighborhood streets and subway stairways in New York City, as a historic rainfall led to canceled flights and closed roads and city officials urged people to stay at home or shelter in place. Some areas of the city saw up to 2.58 inches of rain in one day, nearly 50% more than the city sewer system's maximum capacity, causing wastewater problems for many low-lying homes and businesses. Intuitively, when an extreme weather event hits a city, the more residents it has, the larger number of people are affected. Currently, 83% of the United States population lives in urban settings, according to the U.S. Census. This number is expected to grow over the coming decades, rendering urban climate resilience extraordinarily important. As a result, many people have the impression that the growing sizes of cities are making weather extremes worse for the people who live there. However, cities are designed and built by people. So, it stands to reason that if some methods of land development increase population exposures to extreme weather conditions, others might hold the potential to moderate or even reduce population exposures as the climate changes over the coming decades. To explore this idea, University of Delaware researcher Jing Gao, assistant professor in the College of Earth, Ocean and Environment and a resident faculty member in the Data Science Institute, and colleague Melissa Bukovsky, associate professor in the Haub School of Environment and Natural Resources at the University of Wyoming, investigated how changes in urban land and population will affect future populations' exposures to weather extremes under climate conditions at the end of the 21st century. The researchers looked at urban areas across the continental United States, including cities large and small, with various development densities and in different climate regions. They used a data-driven model developed by Gao to predict how urban areas across the country will grow by 2100, based on development trends observed over the past 40 years. The research team considered how these urban land changes might affect weather extremes like heat waves, cold waves, heavy rainfalls and severe thunderstorms. They then analyzed how many people would be exposed to these extremes under different climate and urban development conditions at the end of the century. The research team's simulations showed that at the end of the 21st century, how a city is laid out or organized spatially, often called an urban land pattern, has the potential to reduce population exposures to future weather extremes, even for heat waves under very high urban expansion rates. Further, how the urban landscape is designed -- meaning how buildings are clustered or dispersed and how they fit into the surrounding environment -- seem to matter more than simply the size of a city. This is true even while climate change is increasing population exposures. These findings apply to all cities, from large metropolitan areas like New York City to smaller towns in more rural contexts, such as Newark, Delaware. "Regardless of the size of a city, well planned urban land patterns can reduce population exposures to weather extremes," Gao said. "In other words, cities large and small can reduce their risks caused by weather extremes by better arranging their land developments." These findings differ from current common perceptions. For example, existing literature in this area has almost exclusively focused on limiting the amount of urban land development, Gao said. In contrast, the new findings from this research encourage researchers and practitioners from a wide range of related fields to reconsider how cities are designed and built so that they can be in harmony with their regional natural surroundings and more resilient to potential climate risks over the long run. Gao likened the effects of climate change and urban land patterns on extreme weather risks to the effects of a person's diet and activity level on their risk for health problems. Properly designed urban land patterns, she said, are like physical exercises that work to counteract poor dietary choices, contributing to a reduced risk for disease, while helping a person become more fit in general. "Carefully designed urban land patterns cannot completely erase increased population exposures to weather extremes resulting from climate change, but it can generate a meaningful reduction of the increase in risks," Gao said. And the cost to start is small, Gao said. No extravagant measure, such as leveling and rebuilding a large area at once, is required. "Instead, when building new and renovating existing parts of a city, we should adjust our mindset to consider how the new development and renovation will change the way the city as a whole situates in its natural surroundings, and how the city and its surrounds can be one integrated human-environment system at large scales over the long run," Gao said. "The key is to start adjusting how we think about development now." Next steps in the work The researchers are working to identify specific characteristics about the spatial arrangement of a city that can make it more -- or less -- resilient to future weather extremes. Identifying these patterns can help guide development that is more sustainable in the face of increasing instances of extreme weather. Through their efforts, the research team hopes to provide actionable suggestions for how to design and build urban areas that reduce their residents' exposures to weather extremes in the long run. Importantly, the researchers emphasized that these characteristics will likely vary from region to region, now and as climate changes. For instance, what works in arid Phoenix, Arizona, will probably differ from what will work in humid New Orleans, Louisiana. Likewise, what might work today for a city could differ from what will work in the future, as climate conditions evolve. "Eventually, we want our work to be directly useful to urban design and planning efforts, offering insights and tools for decision makers to influence long-term social and environmental well-being at scale," Bukovsky said. "First, though, we need to identify what development patterns can improve various cities' long-term climate resilience. We will continue collaborating in the future."

The study's authors say they have identified giant meanders in the global jet stream that bring polar air southward, locking in frigid or wet conditions concurrently over much of North America and Europe, often for weeks at a time. Such weather waves, they say, have doubled in frequency since the 1960s. In just the last few years, they have killed hundreds of people and paralyzed energy and transport systems. The new paper appears this week in the Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. "Even though winters are getting milder on average, it's happening at the expense of increasingly devastating heat extremes in the warm season," said author Kai Kornhuber, an adjunct scientist at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. "A hundred years from now, we will probably not have to worry as much about extreme cold, because everything is getting warmer. But today and going forward, cold is still a very relevant hazard." The jet stream is a fast-moving river of air that continuously circles the Northern Hemisphere from east to west. It generally flows within relatively straight boundaries, segregating cold polar air masses from the midlatitudes, but at times it can naturally develop big wobbles. Some scientists think these wobbles are increasing in size and frequency due to rapid warming in the Arctic that is far out proportion to more southerly regions; this destabilizes the system, generating winds that break down the north-south barrier, they say. Given the right conditions, certain of these wobbles can become amplified into symmetrical waves that then lock in place across the globe, somewhat similar to the vibrations that produce a constant musical pitch. These are called Rossby waves. In a 2019 study Kornhuber and colleagues showed that a repeating Rossby wave pattern known as a wave-7 -- that is, seven giant peaks and seven matching troughs spanning the globe -- draws warm, dry air from the subtropics up to the midlatitudes, causing concurrent summer heat waves and droughts in predictable parts of North America, Europe and Asia. These can cause widespread, simultaneous crop losses in important breadbasket regions, the study said. The newer paper shows more or less the other side of the coin. A winter pattern known as a wave-4 -- globally, four peaks and four matching troughs -- tend to lock in place. The authors say that when this happens, the chances of extreme cold or wet in the trough triples. At the same time, abnormally warm or dry conditions may develop in the peaks. The most recent major wave-4 iteration brought a February 2021 cold wave to much of Canada, the United States and even northern Mexico. Temperatures fell as much as 50 degrees F below average as far south as the U.S. Gulf Coast. Parts of the Deep South saw rare snowfall. Hardest hit: Texas, where record cold paralyzed natural gas pipelines and other energy infrastructure, knocking out much of the electricity grid and causing homes and businesses to go dark and freeze. All told, at least 278 people were killed directly or indirectly by the cold wave, and there was nearly $200 billion in damage. A similar though less destructive event caused a January-February 2019 cold snap in the eastern United States, killing more than 20 people. The same pattern often hits on the other side of the Atlantic at the same time, usually most most extreme in southwestern Europe and Scandinavia. The January-February 2019 event brought extreme low temperatures to both southern France and Sweden. At the same time, by sweeping in moist air from the Atlantic, it caused extreme precipitation and flooding across many areas in central and eastern Europe. Similar events took place in Europe in 2013 and 2018. The researchers say that 50 years ago, such concurrent waves took hold on average only once each winter. The numbers vary year to year, but now the average has risen to twice a year. "This adds to the growing evidence that extreme weather over North America and Europe are often synchronized," said the study's other author, Gabriele Messori of Sweden's Uppsala University. Messori published a paper earlier this year noting repeated example of this phenomenon, and hypothesizing a connection to large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns. Kornhuber said the exact mechanisms that cause the emergence of the wave-4 pattern require further research, but he suspects it starts with periodic changes in oceanic conditions over parts of the Pacific that, under the right circumstances, can trigger a global chain reaction. Pinning down that mechanism might allow scientists to better predict the cold or wet waves, he said. Kornuber said that there is growing evidence of a connection between warming climate and the summer meanders that bring heat waves; however the winter waves are still a matter of intense scientific discourse. Scientists are currently investigating several possible mechanisms that could point to a climate connection, and how things might evolve in future. Kornhuber noted that a study he coauthored earlier this year showed that climate models still struggle to reproduce the most extreme regional weather anomalies associated with these larger-scale patterns even in summer; this could lead to underestimations of potential weather-related crop losses in particular areas. He said upcoming work will focus on investigating whether the worst extreme are linked to human causes or just natural variability.

